PolitiFact | Fact-checking Mike Pence, night 3 of the 2020 RNC The Poynter Institute Menu Donate State Editions California Florida Illinois Iowa Missouri New York North Carolina Pennsylvania Texas Virginia West Virginia Vermont Wisconsin Michigan Issues All Issues Online hoaxes Coronavirus Health Care Immigration Taxes Marijuana Environment Crime Guns Foreign Policy People All People Joe Biden Kamala Harris Charles Schumer Mitch McConnell Bernie Sanders Nancy Pelosi Donald Trump Media PunditFact Tucker Carlson Sean Hannity Rachel Maddow Rush Limbaugh Bloggers Campaigns 2020 Elections Truth-o-Meter True Mostly True Half True Mostly False False Pants on Fire Promises Biden Promise Tracker Trump-O-Meter Obameter Latest Promises About Us Our Process Our Staff Who pays for Politifact? Advertise with Us Suggest a Fact-check Corrections and Updates Donate Follow us The Facts Newsletter Sign up Stand up for the facts! Misinformation isn't going away just because it's a new year. Support trusted, factual information with a tax deductible contribution to PolitiFact. More Info I would like to contribute One Time Monthly Yearly Join Now Fact-checking Mike Pence, night 3 of the 2020 RNC Immigration Elections Energy Health Care History Coronavirus Vice President Mike Pence arrives with his wife Karen Pence to speak on the third day of the Republican National Convention at Fort McHenry National Monument and Historic Shrine in Baltimore, Wednesday, Aug. 26, 2020. (AP Photo/Andrew Harnik) By PolitiFact Staff August 26, 2020 If Your Time is short Read more about our process of how we select claims to check . See our coverage of the Democratic National Convention from last week. In accepting the Republican Party nomination on Aug. 27, Vice President Mike Pence accurately recounted the history of Baltimore's Fort McHenry, and how a failed British bombardment in 1814 helped inspire Francis Scott Key to write "The Star-Spangled Banner." Pence's attacks on Democratic presidential nominee Joe Biden, on the other hand, were sometimes misleading, incomplete or wrong. Jump to our fact-checks of false or misleading claims made by other RNC speakers. Vice President Mike Pence "Joe Biden wants to end school choice." This is Mostly False . (Trump made the same claim in July.) Biden wants to end voucher programs that use public money to pay for private school tuition. He also opposes for-profit and low-performing charter schools. But he supports high-performing charter schools and allowing students to pick among public schools. Those also qualify as school choice options. "When asked whether he’d support cutting funding to law enforcement, (Biden) replied, ‘Yes, absolutely.’" Pence took Biden’s remarks from an interview with liberal activist Ady Barkan out of context. Biden is opposed to defunding the police. Barkan said deadly police encounters with citizens could be reduced if some police funding were redirected to social services, mental health counseling and affordable housing. "Are you open to that kind of reform?" Barkan asked. Biden replied: "Yes. I proposed that kind of reform." Biden did not speak about reducing police funding. He talked about police using military equipment in their communities. Barkan then interjected, asking about the military equipment: "But do we agree that we can redirect some of the funding?" Biden replied: "Yes. Absolutely." Biden has proposed more federal funding for community policing and has said he is open to shifting some police funding to services such as mental health counseling. "President Trump marshalled the full resources of our federal government (to deal with the coronavirus) from the outset. He directed us to forge a seamless partnership with governors across America in both political parties." Revisionist history . After declaring a national emergency over the health crisis on March 13, Trump directed governors to order their own ventilators, respirators and supplies, saying the federal government is "not a shipping clerk." Governors say the disjointed response left states bidding against one another and the federal government for access to critical equipment. New York Gov. Andrew Cuomo said it was akin to competing on eBay with 50 other states and the Federal Emergency Management Agency. Maryland Gov. Larry Hogan, a Republican, pleaded for better coordination to ensure that supplies were distributed based on need. As late as July , some governors were calling on the feds for help and not getting what they needed. There were shortages of testing supplies, as well as personal protection gear. Washington state asked for 4.2 million N-95 respirators. It got a bit under 500,000. It asked for about 300,000 gowns. It got about 160,000. "Before the first case of the coronavirus spread within the United States, the president took unprecedented action and suspended all travel from China." Pence’s timeline is wrong, and Trump didn’t ban "all" travel from China; there were exemptions. Here’s the correct timeline: Jan. 21 : The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention confirmed the first U.S. case of the new coronavirus, a patient in Washington state who had traveled from Wuhan, China. Jan. 30 : The CDC confirmed the first instance of person-to-person spread of the new coronavirus in the United States. It involved a couple in Illinois, one spouse who had traveled to Wuhan and one who had not traveled. Jan. 31 : The Trump administration announced a ban on travelers from China, exempting several categories of people, including U.S. citizens and lawful permanent residents. It went into effect Feb. 2. Trump’s proclamation acknowledged that the virus "has spread between two people in the United States, representing the first instance of person-to-person transmission of the virus within the United States." According to the New York Times , about 40,000 people traveled from China to the United States in the two months after Trump announced travel restrictions, and 60 percent of people on direct flights from China were not U.S. citizens. "As we speak we’re developing a growing number of treatments, including convalescent plasma, that are saving lives all across the country." This requires context. Days before Pence’s speech, the Food and Drug Administration authorized the use of convalescent plasma for the treatment of hospitalized COVID-19 patients. This treatment involves isolating COVID-19 antibodies from the plasma of people who have recently recovered from the virus and injecting the antibodies into patients in the early stages of the illness. Although the Trump administration has said this treatment shows some encouraging early findings, the data they shared was based on a Mayo Clinic preliminary analysis that has not been peer reviewed. Clinicians and researchers have urged caution, maintaining that more research is necessary before a survival benefit is proven. They also question the timing of the authorization — which came on the eve of the Republican convention. "Joe Biden is for open borders, sanctuary cities, free lawyers and health care for illegal immigrants." This is a mix of misleading and accurate characterizations of Biden’s positions. Open borders: Biden said that if elected, "there will not be another foot of wall constructed." But that’s not the same as advocating for "open borders." His immigration plan says he would enforce immigration laws, "implement effective border screening" and "secure our border, while ensuring the dignity of migrants and upholding their legal right to seek asylum." Sanctuary cities: Biden was asked at a Democratic primary debate if immigrants illegally in the country who are arrested by local police should be turned over to immigration officials. "No," Biden answered. While there’s no official definition for sanctuary cities, the term is commonly applied to cities that limit their cooperation with federal immigration authorities. Free lawyers: Biden would double the number of immigration judges, court staff, and interpreters working on immigration cases. His plan says humanitarian needs are best met through a network of organizations, including legal non-profits, and that Biden would "dramatically increase U.S. government resources" to support migrants waiting on their asylum cases and the organizations helping them. But it doesn’t specify "free lawyers." Health care: Biden supports extending health care access to all immigrants, even if they are illegally in the country. (The health care would not be "free.") A task force comprised of appointees of Biden and Sen. Bernie Sanders, I-Vt. recommended allowing immigrants illegally in the country to buy health insurance, without federal subsidies. "Where this president achieved energy independence for the United States, Joe Biden would abolish fossil fuels (and) end fracking." The United States isn’t energy independent; it continues to import oil and natural gas, but the U.S. is close to regularly producing more energy than it consumes. Beyond that, Pence offered a misleading portrayal of Biden’s positions on fossil fuels and fracking. Overall, Biden’s plan calls for the U.S. to reach net-zero emissions by 2050. Biden plans to pay for his plan by raising the corporate income tax rate, increasing taxes on wealthy Americans and using stimulus money. Biden’s plan aims to wean the country off of fossil fuels. It says he would end subsidies for fossil fuels and redirect those resources to investments in clean energy infrastructure. Biden has not called for banning hydraulic fracturing, or "fracking," outright. He would block the federal government from issuing new permits for drilling on public land and would allow existing fracking operations to continue. He spoke inaccurately about his stance on fracking during a Democratic primary debate in March; his campaign had to clarify that official position hadn’t changed. South Dakota Gov. Kristi Noem Trump "shrunk government." The scale of federal spending has grown on Trump’s watch, and not only because of autopilot spending programs such as Social Security, Medicare, and Medicaid. As a percentage of gross domestic product, federal spending has gone up on Trump’s watch as well. In 2017, Trump’s first year in office, federal spending accounted for 20.6% of GDP. In 2019, it reached 21%. The Committee for a Responsible Federal Budget , which takes a hawkish view on federal spending, estimated that Trump had signed laws requiring $4.7 trillion in new debt, roughly half from tax cuts and half from spending increases. Madison Cawthorn, North Carolina congressional candidate "James Madison was just 25 years old when he signed the Declaration of Independence." Madison didn’t sign the Declaration of Independence. Burgess Owens, Utah congressional candidate "Mobs torched our cities while popular members of Congress promote the same socialism my father fought against in World War II." The United States didn’t fight socialists in World War II. The U.S. fought fascists (Germany and Italy) and an empire (Japan). The U.S. fought on the same side as communists (the Soviet Union). Kayleigh McEnany, press secretary "I can tell you that this president stands by Americans with preexisting conditions." McEnany was sharing her personal story of having a preventive mastectomy to minimize her risk for breast cancer, which was prevalent in her family. Trump called to see how she felt after her surgery and, she said, has since continued to be a source of support. However, the support he provided her has not translated into supporting legal protections for people who have preexisting conditions from being excluded from health plans or charged higher rates. In fact, we rated a claim by Trump in which he said he was the person who saved pre-existing conditions as Pants on Fire . He got a False rating for saying he would protect those with pre-existing conditions. The Affordable Care Act, which was signed into law by President Barack Obama in 2010, put in place these protections. Trump has supported overturning the ACA. In 2017, Trump supported congressional efforts to repeal the ACA. The Trump administration is now backing the efforts to overturn the ACA via a court case. He has also expanded short-term health plans that don’t have to comply with the ACA. Sen. Marsha Blackburn, R-Tenn. "Nancy Pelosi says that China would prefer Joe Biden." Pelosi was relaying the words of the intelligence community. Intelligence officials have shared few public details, but their core finding was that Russia aimed to undercut Biden, while China and Iran didn’t want Trump to win. "What they said is, China would prefer Joe Biden," Pelosi said Aug. 9 . "Whether they do — that's their conclusion, that they would prefer Joe Biden." Lara Trump, daughter-in-law of President Donald Trump "Abraham Lincoln once famously said, ‘America will never be destroyed from the outside. If we falter and lose our freedoms, it will be because we destroyed ourselves’." Lincoln didn’t say that . "It is not accurate, in that Lincoln never spoke or wrote it. But it is not totally fabricated either," Christian McWhirter, a Lincoln historian at the Abraham Lincoln Presidential Library and Museum, told PolitiFact. On Jan. 27, 1838, Lincoln spoke before the Young Men’s Lyceum of Springfield, Ill., about "the perpetuation of our political institutions." During that address, Lincoln said: "At what point then is the approach of danger to be expected? I answer, if it ever reach us, it must spring up amongst us. It cannot come from abroad. If destruction be our lot, we must ourselves be its author and finisher. As a nation of freemen, we must live through all time, or die by suicide." Sen. Joni Ernst, R-Iowa "This Democratic Party of Joe Biden is pushing the so-called Green New Deal. If given power, they would essentially ban animal agriculture and eliminate gas-powered cars." Biden isn’t pushing the Green New Deal, which calls for net-zero emissions in 10 years. Biden’s plan proposes to reach net-zero emissions by 2050. Neither plan would ban "animal agriculture and eliminate gas-powered cars." "Net-zero" means balancing the amount of carbon emissions caused by humans (things like gas-powered cars) with a similar amount of things that can remove carbon dioxide from the environment (like restoring forests). Richard Grinell, former acting director of national intelligence "The Obama-Biden administration secretly launched a surveillance operation on the Trump campaign." This is wrong because it ignores the firewall between the FBI and the White House. The FBI did investigate four people with some degree of ties to the Trump 2016 campaign. But there’s no evidence that former President Barack Obama initiated that work. The FBI operation, called Crossfire Hurricane, targeted four men within the Trump campaign orbit, including campaign manager Paul Manafort and national security adviser Michael Flynn. That FBI investigation itself has been the subject of investigations by the Justice Department and Congress. Not one concluded that the FBI lacked good reason to launch the investigation. Not one found that Obama initiated or meddled in the FBI’s work. Jon Greenberg, Louis Jacobson, Samantha Putterman, Amy Sherman, Paul Specht, Miriam Valverde and Kaiser Health News reporter Victoria Knight contributed to this report. All photos courtesy of the Associated Press. It’s never been more important to know the facts... 2020 is not what any of us expected. We thought we’d be fact-checking a spirited political debate about the economy, health care and more ahead of voting in November. Well, we’re still doing that, but in the midst of the worst public health crisis in a century. The coronavirus pandemic has been a call to action for all fact-checking newsrooms like ours to root out harmful hoaxes because, and we can say this with certainty, every single person in the U.S. is affected by the spread of COVID-19 and misinformation around it. And, while it’s never been more essential to read our fact-checking, PolitiFact is not immune from the economic uncertainty that the pandemic brings. We’re doing everything in our power to expand our coverage of both COVID-19 and Election 2020 as a public service to all those who need it. Without a paywall, we’re humbly asking for donations from readers like you to support our newsroom as we continue to provide you with the truth. If you can, please support PolitiFact with whatever you can spare during this time. It’s easy to sign up to be a member of the Truth Squad, and just takes a minute. Thank you for reading PolitiFact. Loading… Sign Up For Our Weekly Newsletter Our Sources See fact-checks and linked resources. Read About Our Process The Principles of the Truth-O-Meter Browse the Truth-O-Meter More by PolitiFact Staff Louise Slaughter stated on September 5, 2017 a tweet: Rescinding the Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals program "will harm our economy." By PolitiFact Staff • September 10, 2017 Bloggers stated on March 2, 2017 a headline: "Doctors who discovered cancer enzymes in vaccines all found murdered." By PolitiFact Staff • April 4, 2017 David Menchetti stated on November 28, 2016 testimony before the Illinois House Labor and Commerce Committee: "The causation standard in Indiana is exactly the same as it is in Illinois." By PolitiFact Staff • December 19, 2016 Kasim Reed stated on September 16, 2016 a White House press conference: "If you look at any real analysis," the Trans-Pacific Partnership is "going to generate better-paying jobs that are more stable." By PolitiFact Staff • September 30, 2016 Kasim Reed stated on November 17, 2015 press release: While the smoking rate nationally has fallen, more than 18 percent of Georgians still light up. By PolitiFact Staff • November 30, 2015 NextGen Climate Action Committee stated on August 8, 2014 a campaign ad: Says Rick Scott "is letting Duke (Energy) keep collecting billions" despite troubled power plants. By PolitiFact Staff • August 13, 2014 Georgia Department of Transportation stated on July 19, 2011 a press release: The Northwest Corridor highway project in Cobb and Cherokee counties "is expected to create over 9,700 jobs statewide." By PolitiFact Staff • August 10, 2011 Republican National Committee stated on June 5, 2008 in a news release: Obama couldn't have afforded his home without Rezko's help. By PolitiFact Staff • June 17, 2008 Fact-checking Mike Pence, night 3 of the 2020 RNC Ron Johnson stated on April 8, 2021 in Twitter: With federal stimulus money for schools, “no distinctions are being made between Wisconsin schools that remain closed to in-person learning, and those that have been re-opened for months.” By Laura Schulte • May 5, 2021 TikTok posts stated on May 30, 2021 in a TikTok video: If you get the COVID-19 vaccine, you can't donate blood or plasma "because it's completely tainted." By Gabrielle Settles • May 3, 2021 Viral image stated on April 29, 2021 in an image on Facebook: 11.6 million people watched Biden’s first presidential address to Congress while far larger audiences watched Donald Trump’s speeches. By Madison Czopek • May 3, 2021 Janet Yellen stated on May 2, 2021 in an interview on NBC's "Meet the Press": “Corporate income has increased as a share of” gross domestic product. By Louis Jacobson • May 3, 2021 Facebook posts stated on April 29, 2021 in a Facebook post: An audit of the 2020 election in Maricopa County, Ariz., “is confirming the rumors that real ballots have a special watermark.” By Tom Kertscher • May 3, 2021 Viral image stated on April 23, 2021 in a Facebook post: Images show LeBron James standing for China's national anthem while shouting during the United States’ national anthem. By Andy Nguyen • May 3, 2021 Facebook posts stated on May 2, 2021 in a Facebook post: Says Kentucky Derby jockey John Velazquez turned down an invitation to the White House and said, “if I wanted to see a horse’s ass I would of came in second.” By Ciara O'Rourke • May 3, 2021 Facebook posts stated on April 24, 2021 in a Facebook post: Social media posts stated: “Remember Kamala telling Joe during the debate, ‘You will do whatever the Chinese tell you! They gave your son over a billion dollars.’” By Sasha Hupka • April 30, 2021 Randy Feenstra stated on April 28, 2021 in a tweet: "Only <6% of the $2.1 trillion 'infrastructure' bill contains funding for roads & bridges.” By Lyle Muller • April 30, 2021 Facebook posts stated on April 24, 2021 in a Facebook post: “Anyone remember Kamala telling Joe during the debate: ‘You will do whatever the Chinese tell you! They gave your son over a billion dollars.’” By Bill McCarthy • April 30, 2021 Load more Offices District of Columbia 1100 Connecticut Ave. NW Suite 1300B Washington, DC 20036 Florida 801 3rd St. S St. Petersburg, FL 33701 727-821-9494 People All People Joe Biden Kamala Harris Charles Schumer Mitch McConnell Bernie Sanders Nancy Pelosi Donald Trump State Editions California Florida Illinois Iowa Missouri New York North Carolina Pennsylvania Texas Virginia West Virginia Vermont Wisconsin Michigan About Us Our Process Our Staff Who pays for PolitiFact? Advertise with Us Corrections and Updates RSS Feeds Recent Articles and Fact-checks Recent Fact-checks Suggest a Fact-check Follow us The Facts Newsletter Sign up Terms & Conditions Privacy Policy Copyright ©All Rights Reserved Poynter Institute 2020, a 501(c)(3) nonprofit organization
Fact check: On a list of 10 Donald Trump 'accomplishments,' 3 are true Track vaccinations Comparing vaccines 🌙 + 📧 = 😏 You must see these 10 News Sports Entertainment Life Money Tech Travel Opinion Subscribe FACT CHECK Fact check: On a viral list of 10 Trump 'accomplishments,' 3 are true Ella Lee USA TODAY The claim: President Donald Trump achieved these 10 things As President Donald Trump is in the final stretch of his bid for reelection, some of his supporters are pointing to accomplishments the president supposedly has achieved since he took office in 2017. “President Donald Trump over the last week did the following, but you probably won't hear about it from the News,” the Facebook post reads, accompanied by three muscle-flexing emoji and an American flag emoji. The post then lists 10 supposed accomplishments, from making vaccines voluntary to busting global trafficking rings. The original poster did not respond to USA TODAY’s request for comment. Here’s a breakdown of each claim. 1. Trump made vaccines voluntary, not mandatory. The military will check purity and distribute vaccines Every state in the U.S. requires children to be vaccinated against certain diseases as a condition for attending school. Those laws have been put in place by state governments , not the federal government. For example, all states require vaccinations against DTaP, MMR and polio to attend any school, while the HPV, influenza and Hepatitis A and B vaccines are required by some states, but not all. All school immunization laws offer exemptions to children for medical reasons, and 45 states plus Washington, D.C., grant exemptions for religious reasons, according to the National Conference of State Legislatures . Just 15 states allow exemptions for philosophical reasons. More: Scientists worry FDA could be pressured to approve COVID vaccine before it's fully tested It’s possible this claim stemmed from comments the president made at a May 15 press briefing regarding the production of the COVID-19 vaccine. “We’re looking for a full vaccine for everyone that wants to get it,” Trump said. “Not everybody is going to want to get it.” At that same press conference, Trump indicated the military may be involved in the distribution of the vaccine, asserting that once the vaccine is ready the government will “deploy every plane, truck and soldier required to help distribute it to the American people as quickly as possible.” Trump’s claim about military distribution was later refuted by White House and Defense Department officials, according to McClatchy DC . USA TODAY found no evidence indicating the military will check the purity of the vaccine. Our rating: False 2. Trump defunded the World Health Organization ‘forever’ and wants an investigation into its operations Trump announced in April that he planned to stop funding the World Health Organization. “Today I’m instructing my administration to halt funding of the World Health Organization while a review is conducted to assess the World Health Organization’s role in severely mismanaging and covering up the spread of the coronavirus,” Trump told reporters April 14 . “…As the organization’s leading sponsor, the United States has a duty to insist on full accountability.” Whether the president can actually stop funding WHO is another question. Congress holds the country’s spending power, so if Congress mandates aid to WHO by statute, Trump has no constitutional authority to deny it, according to an "Expert Forum" analysis published by the American Constitution Society, a left-leaning organization. However, current appropriations laws give the administration some flexibility over WHO funding, so the administration may have the authority to withhold funding until Congress eliminates that flexibility, the analysis explains. The U.S. still owes WHO money, too. AFP reported that as of May 31, the U.S. owed WHO $203 million in outstanding assessed contribution fees, according to a WHO status report. As of Aug. 31, the U.S. owes WHO about $99 million , that report states, indicating the U.S. has paid WHO since Trump’s claims were made. Our rating: Missing context 3. Trump canceled the Democrats’ HR6666 bill, known as the COVID-19 TRACE Act, that was the basis for Bill Gates’ diagnosis and tracking project, which was also canceled The TRACE Act , introduced by Rep. Bobby Rush, D-Ill., in May, is still active. The bill would provide $100 billion in grants to organizations that perform COVID-19 testing, tracing and at-home services. Eligible entities include some health centers, nonprofit organizations and some hospitals and schools, according to Congress’ summary of the bill. It also could be used to pay staff or purchase personal protective equipment. Fact check: 'Plandemic' sequel makes false claims about Bill Gates It was referred to the House Committee on Energy and Commerce on May 1. To become law, next, the bill will need to pass out of the committee and pass in the House and Senate. Then, it will need to be signed by the president. USA TODAY has previously reported that Bill Gates was not involved in crafting the bill. "In our home state of Washington, our staff have provided advisory support to public health officials on their COVID-19 response efforts,” the Gates Foundation told USA TODAY in a statement. “This has included participating in discussions about epidemiological approaches, such as testing, isolation, contact tracing and quarantine. The Gates Foundation has not provided grant funding to expand contact tracing in the U.S.” Our rating: False 4. Trump canceled Bill Gates’ project known as ID2020 ID2020 is not Bill Gates’ project, and Trump hasn’t canceled it. Dakota Gruener is ID2020’s executive director. She launched the ID2020 Alliance program after working at Gavi, the Vaccine Alliance, where she worked as the right hand woman to the CEO, according to her staff bio . More: 'It helps the world': Bill Gates pushing to get US back to fighting coronavirus globally Founding partners of the program include Microsoft and Gavi, which is where the Gates connection comes in. Gates co-founded Microsoft, and Gavi receives funding from the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation. Our rating: False 5. Trump opened a complaint platform to report censorship on Facebook, Twitter and YouTube The Trump administration launched a website in May asking for examples of Americans being censored on social media platforms like Facebook, Twitter and YouTube. At the time, the form asked users to submit their name, phone number and whether they are a U.S. citizen, USA TODAY reported . Then it asked for incidents of censorship. More: Trump White House solicits examples of social media censorship "SOCIAL MEDIA PLATFORMS should advance FREEDOM OF SPEECH. Yet too many Americans have seen their accounts suspended, banned, or fraudulently reported for unclear 'violations' of user policies," the White House website reads. The website says it is no longer accepting new responses. Our rating: True 6. Trump issued an executive order to reopen states; governors who refuse will be sued Trump did not sign an executive order requiring states to reopen, according to the Federal Register , which archives executive orders, and even if he did want to open states, it’s not likely he’d have the power to do so. "Trump has no authority to ease social distancing, or to open schools or private businesses," Kathleen Bergin, a professor at Cornell Law School, told NPR . "These are matters for states to decide under their power to promote public health and welfare, a power guaranteed by the 10th Amendment to the Constitution. Despite what he claims, no president has absolute authority over domestic policy, and he certainly has no power to override the type of measures that have been taken across the country that have proved successful in flattening the curve.” The idea of taking legal action against governors’ COVID-19 lockdown plans, however, was raised by Attorney General William Barr in April, USA TODAY previously reported . "We’re looking carefully at a number of these rules that are being put into place," Barr said in an interview with conservative talk show host Hugh Hewitt on April 21. "And if we think one goes too far, we initially try to jawbone the governors into rolling them back or adjusting them. And if they’re not and people bring lawsuits, we file statement of interest and side with the plaintiffs." At a later press briefing, Trump did not dismiss the idea. “It would depend on the state, it would depend on the circumstances of the state,” Trump said when asked about Barr’s directive to federal prosecutors April 27, The Daily Beast reported . Our rating: Partly false 7. Trump issued an executive order for the White House to take over all electrical grids, which will include internet servers, broadcasting systems and electronic systems The president did issue an executive order intended to secure the country’s bulk-power system, but the order does not allow the White House to “take over” electrical grids. The order seeks to protect the U.S.’ electricity system from cyber and other attacks, Reuters reported . More: Californians look to home batteries as backup for unreliable electric grid “It is imperative the bulk-power system be secured against exploitation and attacks by foreign threats,” Energy Secretary Dan Brouillette said in a press release . “This Executive Order will greatly diminish the ability of foreign adversaries to target our critical electric infrastructure.” The order makes no mention of assuming control over all electrical grids, and also does not mention “internet servers,” “broadcasting systems” or “electronic systems.” Our rating: Partly false 8. Trump declared places of worship as ‘essential services.’ Some mayors are fining people for going to church It’s true that Trump deemed places of worship as essential early on in the coronavirus pandemic. “Today, I’m identifying houses of worship — churches, synagogue, and mosques — as essential places that provide essential services,” Trump said at a May 22 press briefing . “Some governors have deemed liquor stores and abortion clinics as essential but have left out churches and other houses of worship. It’s not right. So, I’m correcting this injustice and calling houses of worship essential.” It’s also true that some mayors are fining churches or church-goers, like in Chicago and Greenville, Mississippi . The Mississippi fines have since been canceled . Our rating: True More: Online prayers, social distancing in the pews: Christian leaders debate how to do church amid pandemic 9. Trump applauded Australia and 116 countries for insisting on a ‘China Probe’ into the spread of COVID-19 A resolution that calls for “scientific and collaborative field missions” to trace COVID-19’s transmission path, pushed by Australia and the European Union, was backed by 116 countries, Reuters reported . Trump tweeted in support of the move on May 18, “We are with them!” That same day, China agreed to an independent investigation, but only after the pandemic “has been brought under control,” Chinese president Xi Jinping said at a virtual WHO meeting. Our rating: True 10. Trump arrested and dismantled sex and human trafficking rings in several countries USA TODAY previously reported that there have been 8,559 arrests related to human trafficking made by the Federal Bureau of Investigation and the Immigration and Customers Enforcement’s Homeland Security Investigations. Fact check: Over 8,000 US trafficking arrests since 2017 have not included members of Congress Claims that human trafficking arrests have skyrocketed during Trump’s presidency are false, an in-depth analysis by FactCheck.org found. Trump has, however, been a vocal advocate for ending trafficking. He has signed several laws intended to bolster efforts to eradicate the crime and gave more than $35 million in Justice Department grants to nonprofit organizations that provide housing for human trafficking victims this month. Our rating: False Our rating: Partly false We rate the claim that President Donald Trump achieved this list of 10 things as PARTLY FALSE because some claims were not supported by our research. Three of the claims are true, four are false, one is missing context and two are partly false. Our fact-check sources: Center for Disease Control and Prevention, State School Immunization Requirements and Vaccine Exemption Laws Center for Disease Control and Prevention, State Vaccination Requirements Immunization Action Coalition, State Laws and Mandates by Vaccine National Conference of State Legislatures, June 26, States With Religious and Philosophical Exemptions From School Immunization Requirements White House, May 15, Remarks by President Trump on Vaccine Development McClatchy D.C., July 29, Officials dispute Trump’s claim that military is preparing COVID vaccine distribution White House, April 14, Remarks by President Trump in Press Briefing American Constitution Society, June 1, Can President Trump Defund the WHO? AFP, June 16, Misleading list of Trump’s achievements spreads on social media World Health Organization, July 31, Assessed contributions overview for all Member States TRACE Act GovTrack, May 13, H.R. 6666: COVID-19 Testing, Reaching, And Contacting Everyone (TRACE) Act USA TODAY, May 27, Fact check: Bill Gates did not craft contact tracing bill ID2020, Leadership ID2020, Alliance Gavi, Our Alliance USA TODAY, May 15, Trump White House solicits examples of social media censorship White House, Tech Bias Story Sharing Tool Federal Register, 2020 Donald Trump Executive Orders NPR, April 14, FACT CHECK: Trump Doesn't Have The Authority To Order States To 'Reopen' USA TODAY, April 21, Barr warns of Justice Department intervention if state lockdown orders go 'too far' Daily Beast, April 27, Trump Won’t Rule Out Suing Local Governments to Reopen: ‘It Would Depend on the State’ White House, May 1, Executive Order on Securing the United States Bulk-Power System Reuters, May 1, Trump signs order to protect the U.S. electricity system: Energy Department Department of Energy, May 1, President Trump Signs Executive Order Securing the United States Bulk-Power System White House, May 22, Press Briefing by Press Secretary Kayleigh McEnany Chicago Tribune, May 21, Chicago police fine 3 churches for violating stay-at-home order; businessman Willie Wilson says he’ll pay WREG Memphis, April 10, Mississippi churchgoers fined $500 while attending drive-in service City of Greenville, April 13, Mayor Errick D. Simmons’ Statement Regarding Greenville City Council April 7, 2020 Order on Church Services Reuters, May 18, Australia welcomes growing support for COVID-19 inquiry at WHO meeting President Trump's Twitter , May 18 VOA News, May 18, China Backs Calls for Probe of COVID Origins - But Not Now USA TODAY, Aug. 24, Fact check: Over 8,000 US trafficking arrests since 2017 have not included members of Congress FactCheck.org, Aug. 14, Viral Chart Distorts Human Trafficking Statistics White House, Jan. 9, 2019, President Donald J. Trump Is Fighting to Eradicate Human Trafficking Associated Press, Aug. 4, Trump Gives $35 Million to Aid Human Trafficking Victims Thank you for supporting our journalism. You can subscribe to our print edition, ad-free app or electronic newspaper replica here. Our fact check work is supported in part by a grant from Facebook. This fact check is available at IFCN’s 2020 US Elections FactChat #Chatbot on WhatsApp. Click here , for more. About Us Newsroom Staff Ethical Principles Corrections Press Releases Accessibility Sitemap Terms of Service Your California Privacy Rights/Privacy Policy Privacy Policy Do Not Sell My Info/Cookie Policy Contact Us Help Center My Account Give Feedback Get Home Delivery eNewspaper USA TODAY Shop Licensing & Reprints Advertise Careers Internships Support Local Business News Tips Submitting letters to the editor Podcasts Newsletters Mobile Apps Facebook Twitter Instagram LinkedIn Pinterest YouTube Reddit Flipboard RSS 10Best Reviewed Jobs Moonlighting Sports Weekly Studio Gannett Classifieds The City The Wall Storytellers © 2021 USA TODAY, a division of Gannett Satellite Information Network, LLC.
