IRS provides tax inflation adjustments for tax year 2024 | Internal Revenue Service Skip to main content An official website of the United States Government English Español 中文 (简体) 中文 (繁體) 한국어 Русский Tiếng Việt Kreyòl ayisyen Information Menu Help News Tax Pros Sign in Search Search Include Historical Content - Any - No Include Historical Content - Any - No Search Sign in Menu Main navigation File Overview INFORMATION FOR… Individuals Business and self-employed Charities and nonprofits International filers Retirement Governments and tax-exempt bonds Indian Tribal Governments FILING FOR INDIVIDUALS How to file When to file Where to file Update your information POPULAR Tax record (transcript) Apply for an Employer ID Number (EIN) Amend return Identity Protection PIN (IP PIN) File your taxes for free Pay Overview PAY BY Bank Account (Direct Pay) Payment Plan (Installment Agreement) Electronic Federal Tax Payment System (EFTPS) POPULAR Your Online Account Tax Withholding Estimator Estimated Taxes Penalties Refunds Overview Where’s My Refund? Direct deposit Where’s My Amended Return? Credits & Deductions Overview INFORMATION FOR... Individuals For you and your family Businesses & Self-Employed Standard mileage and other information POPULAR Earned Income Credit (EITC) Child Tax Credit Clean Energy and Vehicle Credits Standard Deduction Retirement Plans Forms & Instructions Overview POPULAR FORMS & INSTRUCTIONS Form 1040 Individual Income Tax Return Form 1040 Instructions Instructions for Form 1040 Form W-9 Request for Taxpayer Identification Number (TIN) and Certification Form 4506-T Request for Transcript of Tax Return Form W-4 Employee's Withholding Certificate Form 941 Employer's Quarterly Federal Tax Return Form W-2 Wage and Tax Statement Form 9465 Installment Agreement Request POPULAR FOR TAX PROS Form 1040-X Amended Individual Income Tax Return Form 2848 Power of Attorney Form W-7 Apply for an ITIN Circular 230 Regulations Governing Practice before the IRS Search Include Historical Content - Any - No Include Historical Content - Any - No Search Information Menu Help News Tax Pros Sign in File Overview INFORMATION FOR… Individuals Business and self-employed Charities and nonprofits International filers Retirement Governments and tax-exempt bonds Indian Tribal Governments FILING FOR INDIVIDUALS How to file When to file Where to file Update your information POPULAR Tax record (transcript) Apply for an Employer ID Number (EIN) Amend return Identity Protection PIN (IP PIN) File your taxes for free Pay Overview PAY BY Bank Account (Direct Pay) Payment Plan (Installment Agreement) Electronic Federal Tax Payment System (EFTPS) POPULAR Your Online Account Tax Withholding Estimator Estimated Taxes Penalties Refunds Overview Where’s My Refund? Direct deposit Where’s My Amended Return? Credits & Deductions Overview INFORMATION FOR... Individuals Businesses & Self-Employed POPULAR Earned Income Credit (EITC) Child Tax Credit Clean Energy and Vehicle Credits Standard Deduction Retirement Plans Forms & Instructions Overview POPULAR FORMS & INSTRUCTIONS Form 1040 Form 1040 Instructions Form W-9 Form 4506-T Form W-4 Form 941 Form W-2 Form 9465 POPULAR FOR TAX PROS Form 1040-X Form 2848 Form W-7 Circular 230 Main navigation File Pay Refunds Credits & Deductions Forms & Instructions Info Menu Mobile Charities & Nonprofits Help News Tax Pros Home News News releases IRS provides tax inflation adjustments for tax year 2024 IRS provides tax inflation adjustments for tax year 2024 More In News Topics in the news News releases News releases for frequently asked questions Multimedia center Tax relief in disaster situations Inflation Reduction Act Tax reform Taxpayer First Act Tax scams and consumer alerts The tax gap Fact sheets IRS Tax Tips e-News subscriptions IRS guidance Media contacts IRS statements and announcements IR-2023-208, Nov. 9, 2023 WASHINGTON — The Internal Revenue Service today announced the annual inflation adjustments for more than 60 tax provisions for tax year 2024, including the tax rate schedules and other tax changes. Revenue Procedure 2023-34 provides detailed information about these annual adjustments. New for 2024 Starting in calendar year 2023, the Inflation Reduction Act reinstates the Hazardous Substance Superfund financing rate for crude oil received at U.S. refineries, and petroleum products that entered into the United States for consumption, use, or warehousing. The tax rate is the sum of the Hazardous Substance Superfund rate and the Oil Spill Liability Trust Fund financing rate. For calendar years beginning in 2024, the Hazardous Substance Superfund financing rate is adjusted for inflation. For calendar year 2024 crude oil or petroleum products entered after Dec. 31, 2016, will have a tax rate of $0.26 cents a barrel. Highlights of changes in Revenue Procedure 2023-34: The tax year 2024 adjustments described below generally apply to income tax returns filed in 2025. The tax items for tax year 2024 of greatest interest to most taxpayers include the following dollar amounts: The standard deduction for married couples filing jointly for tax year 2024 rises to $29,200, an increase of $1,500 from tax year 2023. For single taxpayers and married individuals filing separately, the standard deduction rises to $14,600 for 2024, an increase of $750 from 2023; and for heads of households, the standard deduction will be $21,900 for tax year 2024, an increase of $1,100 from the amount for tax year 2023. Marginal rates : For tax year 2024, the top tax rate remains 37% for individual single taxpayers with incomes greater than $609,350 ($731,200 for married couples filing jointly). The other rates are: 35% for incomes over $243,725 ($487,450 for married couples filing jointly) 32% for incomes over $191,950 ($383,900 for married couples filing jointly) 24% for incomes over $100,525 ($201,050 for married couples filing jointly) 22% for incomes over $47,150 ($94,300 for married couples filing jointly) 12% for incomes over $11,600 ($23,200 for married couples filing jointly) The lowest rate is 10% for incomes of single individuals with incomes of $11,600 or less ($23,200 for married couples filing jointly). The Alternative Minimum Tax exemption amount for tax year 2024 is $85,700 and begins to phase out at $609,350 ($133,300 for married couples filing jointly for whom the exemption begins to phase out at $1,218,700). For comparison, the 2023 exemption amount was $81,300 and began to phase out at $578,150 ($126,500 for married couples filing jointly for whom the exemption began to phase out at $1,156,300). The tax year 2024 maximum Earned Income Tax Credit amount is $7,830 for qualifying taxpayers who have three or more qualifying children, an increase of from $7,430 for tax year 2023. The revenue procedure contains a table providing maximum EITC amount for other categories, income thresholds and phase-outs. For tax year 2024, the monthly limitation for the qualified transportation fringe benefit and the monthly limitation for qualified parking increases to $315, an increase of $15 from the limit for 2023. For the taxable years beginning in 2024, the dollar limitation for employee salary reductions for contributions to health flexible spending arrangements increases to $3,200. For cafeteria plans that permit the carryover of unused amounts, the maximum carryover amount is $640, an increase of $30 from taxable years beginning in 2023. For tax year 2024, participants who have self-only coverage in a Medical Savings Account, the plan must have an annual deductible that is not less than $2,800, an increase of $150 from tax year 2023, but not more than $4,150, an increase of $200 from tax year 2023. For self-only coverage, the maximum out-of-pocket expense amount is $5,550, an increase of $250 from 2023. For tax year 2024, for family coverage, the annual deductible is not less than $5,550, an increase of $200 from tax year 2023; however, the deductible cannot be more than $8,350, an increase of $450 versus the limit for tax year 2023. For family coverage, the out-of-pocket expense limit is $10,200 for tax year 2024, an increase of $550 from tax year 2023. For tax year 2024, the foreign earned income exclusion is $126,500, increased from $120,000 for tax year 2023. Estates of decedents who die during 2024 have a basic exclusion amount of $13,610,000, increased from $12,920,000 for estates of decedents who died in 2023. The annual exclusion for gifts increases to $18,000 for calendar year 2024, increased from $17,000 for calendar year 2023. The maximum credit allowed for adoptions for tax year 2024 is the amount of qualified adoption expenses up to $16,810, increased from $15,950 for 2023. Items unaffected by indexing By statute, certain items that were indexed for inflation in the past are currently not adjusted. The personal exemption for tax year 2024 remains at 0, as it was for 2023. This elimination of the personal exemption was a provision in the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act. For 2024, as in 2023, 2022, 2021, 2020, 2019 and 2018, there is no limitation on itemized deductions, as that limitation was eliminated by the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act. The modified adjusted gross income amount used by taxpayers to determine the reduction in the Lifetime Learning Credit provided in § 25A(d)(2) is not adjusted for inflation for taxable years beginning after Dec. 31, 2020. The Lifetime Learning Credit is phased out for taxpayers with modified adjusted gross income in excess of $80,000 ($160,000 for joint returns). Page Last Reviewed or Updated: 15-Oct-2024 Share Facebook Twitter Linkedin Print Footer Navigation Our Agency About IRS Careers Operations and Budget Tax Statistics Help Find a Local Office Know Your Rights Taxpayer Bill of Rights Taxpayer Advocate Service Independent Office of Appeals Civil Rights FOIA No FEAR Act Data Reliance on Guidance Resolve an Issue IRS Notices and Letters Identity Theft Tax scams Tax Fraud Criminal Investigation Whistleblower Office Languages Español 中文 (简体) 中文 (繁體) 한국어 Pусский Tiếng Việt Kreyòl ayisyen English Other Languages Related Sites U.S. Treasury Treasury Inspector General for Tax Administration USA.gov USAspending.gov Vote.gov Subfooter Privacy Policy Accessibility

Will Trump and Congress Extend TCJA Tax Cuts? - Bloomberg Government Skip to content Bloomberg the Company & Its Products The Company & its Products Bloomberg Terminal Demo Request Bloomberg Anywhere Remote Login Bloomberg Anywhere Login Bloomberg Customer Support Customer Support Bloomberg Connecting decision makers to a dynamic network of information, people and ideas, Bloomberg quickly and accurately delivers business and financial information, news and insight around the world For Customers Bloomberg Anywhere Remote Login Software Updates Manage Products and Account Information Support Americas +1 212 318 2000 EMEA +44 20 7330 7500 Asia Pacific +65 6212 1000 Company About Careers Inclusion at Bloomberg Tech at Bloomberg Philanthropy Sustainability Bloomberg Beta Communications Press Announcements Press Contacts Follow Facebook Instagram LinkedIn YouTube Products Bloomberg Terminal Data Trading Risk Compliance Indices Industry Products Bloomberg Law Bloomberg Tax Bloomberg Government BloombergNEF Media Bloomberg Markets Bloomberg Technology Bloomberg Pursuits Bloomberg Politics Bloomberg Opinion Bloomberg Businessweek Bloomberg Live Conferences Bloomberg Radio Bloomberg Television News Bureaus Media Services Bloomberg Media Distribution Advertising Company About Careers Inclusion at Bloomberg Tech at Bloomberg Philanthropy Sustainability Bloomberg Beta Communications Press Announcements Press Contacts Follow Facebook Instagram LinkedIn YouTube Products Bloomberg Terminal Data Trading Risk Compliance Indices Industry Products Bloomberg Law Bloomberg Tax Bloomberg Government BloombergNEF Media Bloomberg Markets Bloomberg Technology Bloomberg Pursuits Bloomberg Politics Bloomberg Opinion Bloomberg Businessweek Bloomberg Live Conferences Bloomberg Radio Bloomberg Television News Bureaus Media Services Bloomberg Media Distribution Advertising Bloomberg Connecting decision makers to a dynamic network of information, people and ideas, Bloomberg quickly and accurately delivers business and financial information, news and insight around the world For Customers Bloomberg Anywhere Remote Login Software Updates Manage Contracts and Orders Support Americas +1 212 318 2000 EMEA +44 20 7330 7500 Asia Pacific +65 6212 1000 Bloomberg Government Menu Products Bloomberg Government Platform Overview Influence policy with our all-in-one public affairs software News & Analysis Access breaking news and government policy coverage Federal & State Tracking Follow and track legislation and bills across the government Directories Find legislators, bios, agency contacts, and voting history Workflow Tools Streamline efficiencies with collaboration and advocacy tools Innovating with AI See our newest AI solutions, inspired by you. Learn More solutions Corporations Access the tools your government affairs team needs Associations & Nonprofits Master issues with alerts, directories, and tools Government Get everything you need to stay ahead Lobbying & Law Firms Understand impacts and context to quickly advise clients 2025: Policy Shifts Navigate the complexities of policy influence. Learn More insights about Getting Started Experience one platform with news, trackers, and directories Press Releases See our latest news and product updates About Bloomberg Government r Our Approach to AI Learn about our AI tools for government affairs pros Learn More Request Pricing Login Search MENU Congress Elections Will Trump and Congress Extend TCJA Tax Cuts? February 20, 2025 Key provisions from the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act (TCJA) of 2017 are set to expire Dec. 31, 2025. With a Republican-led White House and Congress, policymakers are projected to preserve a majority of the TCJA provisions, but they will need to find a source of funding for the extensions. The debate over tax policy, the federal budget, and the federal deficit is ongoing. Government affairs professionals with interests on either side of the debate need to track tax policy developments as they happen. Staying ahead of policy developments is one of the most critical tasks when planning a successful lobbying and public affairs strategy , especially when it comes to a policy area poised for change, like tax. [Download our report, Tracking and Influencing Tax Policy in 2025 , for tips and best practices to better monitor, respond to, and influence critical tax policy changes with confidence and precision.] What is the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act? The TCJA, passed by a majority-Republican Congress in 2017, was the largest tax code overhaul in nearly three decades. The law cut the corporate tax rate to 21%, capped deductions for state and local taxes (SALT) at $10,000, doubled standard deductions, and expanded the child tax credit. The goal of the one and a half trillion-dollar tax reform bill was to spur economic growth, reduce regulations, and create a more business-friendly environment in the U.S. The TCJA was passed as reconciliation legislation, meaning the bill overrode typical filibuster rules and was passed by a Republican-led Senate with a simple majority of 51 votes. However, many provisions were made temporary to keep costs down and comply with the Byrd Rule, which prohibits reconciliation bills from raising the federal deficit beyond a 10-year budget window or making changes to Social Security. Does the 21% corporate tax rate expire? The TCJA cut the corporate tax rate to 21%, from 35%, which does not expire. Even though the corporate rate was made permanent, lawmakers are reopening the tax code to address all of the TCJA’s expiring provisions, so everything is on the table. While on the campaign trail, Trump has stated that he intends to reduce the corporate rate to 15% for companies that make their products in America. Republicans may have to swallow raising the rate back up a bit during the 2025 negotiations, as Congress will need to find ways to offset a loss of revenue from extending other pieces of the TCJA, especially those benefits for individual taxpayers. Which TCJA corporate tax provisions are set to expire? The potential expiration of the TCJA’s corporate tax provisions poses significant implications for U.S. businesses, including changes to the corporate tax rate, capital expensing, the pass-through income deduction, and international taxation. The following sections describe which provisions are set to expire in more depth. Pass-through income deduction Pass-through businesses – sole proprietorships, partnerships, and S-corporations – will no longer be able to deduct up to 20% of qualified business income (QBI) when calculating annual taxes. Republicans are more staunch supporters of the 199A deduction and claim that it levels the playing field for small and mid-sized business by reducing their tax burden in a similar way to how the TCJA’s corporate tax rate cut did for C-corporations. Industries that primarily benefit from the deduction, such as real estate and manufacturing, have revved up lobbying efforts on Capitol Hill to extend the tax break. Many groups are targeting moderate Democrats to create bipartisan support for the deduction’s extension. Business expense deductions Bonus depreciation The 100% bonus depreciation provision – allowing the deduction of certain capital investments – will be phased out by 2027. The 2025 bonus depreciation rate will be reduced to 40%. Research and development (R&D) The TCJA’s amortization requirement will remain in effect beyond 2025 unless Congress acts to repeal or modify it. The Wyden-Smith bill aims to restore immediate expensing for R&D costs and expand the R&D tax credit. Business interest deduction The business interest deduction will revert to pre-TCJA rules, which generally allowed business interest expenses to be deducted in the year the interest was paid or accrued, with some limitations. International tax provisions International tax policy has significantly changed since TCJA’s passage. Brokered by the Organisation of Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD), a global agreement called Pillar 2, went into effect in 2024 in many countries and will continue to impact businesses worldwide. Pillar 2 aims to curb base erosion and profit shifting (BEPS) by applying a 15% minimum tax rate for multinational enterprises (MNEs) with a global annual revenue of 750 million euros. The TCJA also attempts to address tax avoidance through measures such as the global intangible low-taxed income (GILTI) tax, the foreign-derived intangible income (FDII) tax, and the base erosion and anti-abuse tax (BEAT). However, the TCJA’s provisions and Pillar 2 clash on several key details. There is a safe harbor provision that shields U.S. companies from some of the harshest effects of Pillar 2. But given that the safe harbor provisions expires at the end of 2026, Congress will need to decide how to rectify the TCJA and Pillar 2 clash. [Are you a tax professional? See how Bloomberg Tax provides the tools and intelligence to guide your tax department through changes with ease.] Which TCJA individual tax provisions are set to expire? If Congress doesn’t renew or amend TCJA tax provisions, then individual filers will see a rise in their income tax rates, a lower standard deduction, changes to itemized deductions, and a rollback of the child tax credit. These changes could reshape the financial outlook for many Americans. See more details below. Individual tax rates When the TCJA expires at the end of 2025, marginal tax rates for individuals will revert to pre-TCJA levels, including a maximum rate of 39.6% from 37%. Generally, Democrats are hoping to raise the top rate back up, whereas Republicans support lowering marginal rates. Standard deductions The TCJA nearly doubled the standard deduction for both single and joint filers when it went into effect in 2018. Once the TCJA expires in 2025, the standard deduction will return to pre-TCJA levels, with an adjustment for inflation. Standard deductions before and after TCJA Mortgage interest and charitable donation deductions Once the TCJA expires, single and joint filers will be able to claim a mortgage interest deduction (MID) on properties up to $1 million in value. Between 2018 and 2025, the TCJA limited the MID to $750,000 in property value. Charitable contributions will revert to 50% from 60% of adjusted gross income (AGI). In general, itemized deductions will be more relevant with lower standard deductions. If the standard deduction goes back to a lower level, those making at least $400,000 would see diminishing value of the MID and charity deductions. SALT deductions The $10,000 SALT deduction cap will no longer apply. Since 2018, lawmakers from high-tax states, such as California, New Jersey, and New York, have tried and failed to get rid of or raise the cap, reporting that their constituents were disproportionately affected. Prior to the TCJA, there was no cap on SALT deductions. However, there were levers in place – such as the alternative minimum tax (AMT) – to ensure wealthy taxpayers couldn’t use deductions and loopholes to reduce their federal tax liability to zero. Estate and gift taxes Exemptions from estate and gift taxes will revert to pre-TCJA levels of around $5 million, adjusted for inflation. The 2024 exemption is $13.6 million. Republicans see the estate tax as a “death tax” that punishes wealth accumulation, as in the case of farmers who want to pass on their land through inheritance, but their estate ends up needing to sell assets to cover the estate taxes. Democrats, on the other hand, view the estate and gift taxes as a means to address inequities, where high income earners cannot pass on substantial fortunes or trusts without paying their fair share in taxes. Child tax credit The maximum child tax credit (CTC) will return to $1,000 per child, from the TCJA level of $2,000. Income thresholds will decrease to $75,000 for individuals and $110,000 for married couples. During the pandemic, the CTC was raised even further to $3,600. Census data showed that it cut childhood poverty in half, as a lot more families were eligible for the program. Although Democrats did not vote for the TCJA, party members back the expansion of the CTC. The bipartisan Wyden-Smith bill – which aims to raise the cap on CTC back to $2,000 – has languished in the Senate, though, due to opposition from Senate Republicans. On-demand webinar: Preparing for tax changes post-2025 Chris Cioffi and Danielle Parnass of Bloomberg Government and Kim Dixon of Bloomberg Tax discuss individual and corporate tax provisions that are on the table following TCJA’s expiration and how key decision-makers aim to extend or amend those areas of tax law. See the full replay on tax policy . [Are you a tax professional? See how Bloomberg Tax provides the tools and intelligence to guide your tax department through changes with ease.] Will the TCJA be extended? Partisan control of Congress will have a big impact on whether TCJA provisions will be renewed, reformed, or allowed to expire. Republicans are looking to extend the TCJA and further expand some tax cuts, while Democrats are focused on reforming tax breaks for lower- and middle-income households and raising taxes on wealthier individuals and corporations. There are several possible scenarios for tax policy proposals in 2025: Long-term extension If they control Congress following the 2024 election, Republican lawmakers are aiming to once again use the reconciliation process to extend the TCJA. Because reconciliation bills bypass the filibuster in the Senate and therefore don’t require 60 votes, it would be easier for GOP legislators to pass an extension of the TCJA – so long as there are no intra-party divisions that would affect the simple majority requirement. If Congress is divided, lawmakers could pass a bipartisan agreement that addresses expiring provisions in a long-term or permanent way. This happened in 2012 when a series of tax cuts enacted by George W. Bush were extended. Short-term extension Absent a full agreement, lawmakers could decide to extend the TCJA tax breaks by one or two years to give themselves more time for negotiations. This happened in 2010 when the government was divided after Democrats got “shellacked” in the midterms. Expiration If Congress fails to act, the TCJA’s provisions will expire and revert to pre-2017 levels. Although it is unlikely that all the provisions would expire, if this did happen, both corporate and individual taxpayers would experience a lot of uncertainty. Navigating tax policy changes in 2025 Bloomberg Government not only simplifies tax policy tracking but also empowers professionals to drive impactful advocacy. Our comprehensive, nonpartisan reporting focuses on key political issues and potential policy outcomes, making it an invaluable resource for businesses, lawmakers, and government affairs professionals alike to see what’s on the horizon. Watch the replay of our 2025 Tax Policy Perspectives event to hear from leading tax experts, including U.S. Rep. David Schweikert, on key tax policy issues, such as the expiration the TCJA, the corporate tax rate, and the SALT cap. Request a demo to see how Bloomberg Government can help you stay ahead with access to everything you need to influence better tax policy. Recommended for you The intelligence you need to influence better policy Bloomberg Government’s leading public affairs platform is your one-stop shop for full news coverage, unmatched policy analysis, and a comprehensive suite of tools to power your public affairs strategy. Request a demo to see it for yourself. PRODUCTS Platform Overview Federal and State Tracking Workflow Solutions News & Analysis Directories SOLUTIONS Corporations Associations & Nonprofits Government Lobbying & Law Firms INSIGHTS All Insights About About Bloomberg Government Getting Started Press Releases Connect to learn more about the products and services offered by Bloomberg Government. Request a Demo © 2025 Bloomberg Industry Group, Inc. All Rights Reserved. Trust & Security Privacy Policy Do Not Sell or Share My Personal Information Terms of Service Trademarks Bloomberg Government

Tax Laws and Tax Brackets 2025 | U.S. Bank Skip to main content Log in About us Financial education Support Locations Log in Locations Support Financial Education About us Personal Return to Main Menu Personal Bank accounts Return to Bank accounts Bank accounts Bank Smartly® Checking account Safe Debit account Savings accounts Money market accounts CDs Debit Cards Visa gift cards Mobile & online features Explore checking accounts Explore bank accounts Credit cards Return to Credit cards Credit cards View all credit cards Cash+ Visa Signature Card Altitude Go Visa Signature Card Shield Visa Card Smartly Visa Signature Card Altitude Connect Visa Signature Card Shopper Cash Rewards Visa Signature Card Altitude Go Secured Visa Card Cash+ Secured Visa Card Secured Visa Card Small Business credit cards ExtendPay Plan ExtendPay Loan Investing and retirement Return to Investing and retirement Investing and retirement Automated Investor Online investing Investment management Retirement planning IRAs & 401(k) rollovers Financial goals Explore all services Personal loans & lines Return to Personal loans & lines Personal loans & lines Loans & credit lines Personal loan calculator Debt consolidation Debt consolidation calculator Home repair financing Private seller vehicle loans Home loans Return to Home loans Home loans Mortgages Today's mortgage rates Refinancing Mortgage calculators Home equity First-time home buyers Home improvement loans Manage my mortgage Mortgage help and repayment Vehicle loans Return to Vehicle loans Vehicle loans Auto loans Auto loan calculator RV loans Boat loans Lease servicing Dealer finance Vehicle Manager Mobile and online Return to Mobile and online Mobile and online Mobile & online features U.S. Bank Mobile App Personal spending tracker Savings goal tracker Wealth Management Return to Main Menu Wealth Management Our services Return to Our services Our services Investment management Wealth planning Trusts & estates Banking Insurance Charitable giving Explore our services Investing Return to Investing Investing Investment management IRA Online investing Explore all investing options Your goals Return to Your goals Your goals Plan for retirement Fund an education Pay for a major life event or purchase Leave a legacy Explore all financial goals Advisors & wealth teams Return to Advisors & wealth teams Advisors & wealth teams Find a financial advisor or wealth specialist Explore our wealth teams Private Wealth Management Return to Private Wealth Management Private Wealth Management Our approach Leadership team Client groups & featured professions Find a financial advisor or wealth specialist Find an office Explore Private Wealth Management Our perspectives Return to Our perspectives Our perspectives Market news Investing insights Financial planning Retirement planning Trust & estate planning Explore our perspectives Explore Wealth Management Return to Explore Wealth Management Explore Wealth Management Explore Wealth Management Business Return to Main Menu Business Explore business banking Return to Explore business banking Explore business banking Explore business banking Business bank accounts Return to Business bank accounts Business bank accounts Explore business bank accounts Business checking Business savings and money market accounts Business CDs Online banking Mobile banking Business credit cards Return to Business credit cards Business credit cards View all business credit cards Triple Cash Rewards Visa® Business Card Business Platinum Card Business Altitude® Connect Visa Signature® Card Business Altitude® Power Visa Signature® Card Business Leverage® Visa Signature® Card U.S. Bank Spend Management Pay over time Business loans and lines Return to Business loans and lines Business loans and lines Explore loans & lines Business loans Business lines of credit SBA loans Equipment financing Practice financing Business services Return to Business services Business services Explore business services Cash management Payroll services Business shared access Fraud protection Legal services Gift cards Business payments Return to Business payments Business payments Accepting payments Making payments Merchant services Tax payments Business prepaid cards Business industry expertise Return to Business industry expertise Business industry expertise Explore by business industry Agriculture Healthcare Nonprofit Manufacturing Personal services Professional services Restaurant Retail Specialty contractors Explore business resources Return to Explore business resources Explore business resources Explore business resources Business life stages Online & mobile banking Return to Online & mobile banking Online & mobile banking Online banking Mobile banking Corporate & Commercial Return to Main Menu Corporate & Commercial Explore corporate & commercial Return to Explore corporate & commercial Explore corporate & commercial Explore corporate & commercial Why choose us Contact us Solutions Return to Solutions Solutions Explore our solutions Capital markets Credit & financing International services Liquidity & investments Treasury & payments Return to Treasury & payments Treasury & payments Explore payment solutions Corporate payment services Treasury management Embedded payments Payment processing Digital channels Industries Return to Industries Industries Explore industry expertise Aerospace & defense Aviation Commercial real estate Financial institutions Healthcare Public sector banking Transportation Travel & hospitality Insights Return to Insights Insights Explore our insights Credit and finance Institutional investing International Payments Risk and regulation CFO Insights Report Newsletter subscription Account login Return to Account login Account login Access accounts Client support Institutional Return to Main Menu Institutional Explore institutional Return to Explore institutional Explore institutional Explore institutional U.S. Bancorp Asset Management, Inc. Contact us Custody solutions Return to Custody solutions Custody solutions Explore custody solutions Cash liquidity management Custody asset servicing Employee benefits services Institutional trustee services Reinsurance trust services Global corporate trust Return to Global corporate trust Global corporate trust Explore global corporate trust Collateralized loan obligations (CLO) Corporate escrow services Corporate finance services Default services Document custody services Money market services Public finance services Structured finance services Global fund services Return to Global fund services Global fund services Explore global fund services Alternative investment solutions Exchange traded funds and products Global asset manager solutions Mutual fund solutions Private equity fund solutions Registered investment advisor solutions Account login Return to Account login Account login Access accounts Pivot client portal Close Main Menu Location Locations Branch Branches ATM locations ATM locator Financial guidance and support, tailored for you. Explore the benefits of working with a dedicated wealth team. Find a wealth specialist Financial perspectives / Financial planning / New tax laws 2025: Tax brackets and deductions Financial perspectives / Financial planning / New tax laws 2025: Tax brackets and deductions Article New tax laws 2025: Tax brackets and deductions 6-min read Share: Copy link to clipboard Key takeaways Some of 2025’s tax changes are known, such as changes to tax brackets and the standard deduction. Others remain to be seen, because the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act is set to expire at the end of 2025. Updates include adjustments to retirement plan contribution limits, the annual gift tax exclusion limit and lifetime estate tax exemption amount. As there may be further changes throughout the year, consider consulting with a tax professional to make sure your financial plan is optimized for a healthy financial future. 2025 is likely to be a dynamic year for tax planning, with both known and unknown changes ahead. The “known” changes are somewhat routine. Each year, the IRS makes inflation-related adjustments to more than 60 tax provisions to keep income tax brackets, deductions and other inputs in line with changes occurring related to the cost of living. On average, adjustments for the tax year 2025 (filing returns in 2026) will increase by about 2.8%. The “unknown” changes are where things could get interesting. Several provisions put in place as part of the 2017 Tax Cuts and Jobs Act (TCJA) are set to expire at the end of 2025. Current rules set to expire include: Standard deduction amounts Individual income tax rates Caps on state and local tax (SALT) deductions Deductions for small business owners Limits on estate tax exemptions The new administration in Washington, D.C. will likely present legislation that would impact the outcome of the TCJA sunset and other tax policies. These changes could affect your tax planning strategies during the coming year and therefore bear careful watching. For now, here are details of key existing changes for 2025 as outlined by the IRS. 2025 adjustments to 2024 tax brackets The seven federal tax rates remain the same for 2025: 10%, 12%, 22%, 24%, 32%, 35%, and 37%. The qualifying income for each 2025 tax bracket moves slightly higher compared to 2024. A key income threshold to watch for high-income filers is $197,300 for single filers and $394,600 for married couples filing jointly. Those are the respective thresholds for moving up from the 24% tax rate bracket to the higher 32% rate bracket. The top marginal income rate of 37% will apply to single filers with taxable income of $626,350 and, for married couples filing jointly, taxable income above $751,600. Tax rate Single Filers Married filing Joint Return Head of Household 10% $0 to $11,925 $0 to $23,850 $0 to $17,000 12% $11,925 to $48,475 $23,850 to $96,950 $17,00 to $64,850 22% $48,475 to $103,350 $96,950 to $206,700 $64,850 to $103,350 24% $103,350 to $197,300 $206,700 to $394,600 $103,350 to $197,300 32% $197,300 to $250,525 $394,600 to $501,050 $197,300 to $250,500 35% $250,525 to $626,350 $501,050 to $751,600 $250,500 to $626,350 37% $626,350 or more $751,600 or more $626,350 or more Source: Internal Revenue Service. Standard deduction 2025 The standard deduction represents the amount of income you can exclude from taxes before the above tax rates begin to apply. The 2025 standard deduction increases by $400 for single filers and by $800 for joint filers. People over age 65 or the blind may claim an additional standard deduction of $2,000 for single filers and $1,600 for joint filers. In addition, the standard deduction amount for an individual who may be claimed as a dependent by another taxpayer cannot exceed the greater of $1,350 or the sum of $450 and the individual’s earned income. Filing Status Deduction Amount Single $15,000 Married Filing Jointly $30,000 Head of Household $22,500 2025 capital gains tax brackets Long-term capital gains face different brackets and rates than ordinary income, and those brackets also adjusted slightly higher for 2025. It is possible for people with lower income to pay no long-term capital gains tax when selling appreciated assets that they have held for more than a year (long-term capital gain). For example, the 0% long-term capital gains tax applies to married couples filing a joint return with incomes of $96,700 or below. Applicable long-term capital gains tax rate Single filers with taxable income over Married Couples filing Joint returns, taxable income over Heads of Households, taxable income over 0% $0 $0 $0 15% $48,350 $96,700 $64,750 20% $533,400 $600,050 $566,700 Alternative minimum tax 2025 The alternative minimum tax (AMT) was created in 1969 to close tax loopholes for those in higher tax brackets. The TCJA significantly narrowed the scope of the alternative minimum tax in a few ways, including introducing higher AMT exemptions and higher income levels for exemption phaseout. Adjustments to those provisions for 2025 include: For the 2025 tax year, the AMT exemption increased to $88,100 for individuals and $137,300 for married couples filing jointly. For 2025, AMT exemptions phase out at 25 cents per dollar earned once AMT income (AMTI) reaches $626,350 for single filers and $1,252,700 for married taxpayers filing jointly. Retirement plan contribution adjustments for 2025 The limit on annual contributions to a traditional or Roth IRA for 2025 remains $7,000. The traditional and Roth IRA catch up contribution limit for individuals aged 50 and over remains at $1,000 for 2025. The annual contribution limit for employees who participate in 401(k), 403(b), governmental 457 plans, and the federal government’s Thrift Savings Plan increases to $23,500. Contribution limits for a simplified employee pension (SEP) IRA in 2025 are $70,000 or 25% of the employee's compensation, whichever is lower. This is an increase from the 2024 limit of $69,000. The maximum compensation that can be considered for SEP IRA contributions also increased to $350,000 in 2025. Individuals with a SIMPLE IRA can contribute up to $16,500 in 2025, up from $16,000. Individuals aged 50 and older can contribute an additional $3,500 in catch-up contributions. (See exception for employees ages 60-63 below.) The catch-up contribution limit that generally applies for employees aged 50 and over who participate in most 401(k), 403(b), governmental 457 plans and the federal government’s Thrift Savings Plan remains $7,500 for 2025. (Therefore, participants 50 and older generally can contribute up to $31,000 each year, starting in 2025.) Due to a provision of the Secure 2.0 Act , a higher catch-up contribution limit applies for employees ages 60, 61, 62 and 63 who participate in these plans. For 2025, this higher catch-up contribution limit is $11,250. A higher catch-up contribution limit of $5,250 also applies for individuals ages 60-63 who contribute to a SIMPLE IRA. The Modified Adjusted Gross Income (MAGI) ranges for determining eligibility for Roth IRAs also have increased for 2025. Child tax credit 2025 The maximum child tax credit is $2,000 per qualifying child and is not adjusted for inflation. The refundable portion of the 2025 child tax credit is adjusted for inflation and will remain at $1,700. 2025 gift tax exclusion and lifetime estate tax exemption amounts The 2025 gift tax exclusion allows the first $19,000 of monetary gifts to any person to be excluded from tax, an increase from $18,000 in 2024. The exclusion increased to $190,000 for gifts to spouses who are not citizens of the United States. In addition, the lifetime exclusion amount on estates of decedents who die during 2025 increased to $13.99 million per individual, up from $13.6 million in 2024. Which tax provisions aren’t changing for 2025? Certain items that were indexed for inflation in the past are currently not adjusted. Among those tax issues that remain unchanged: Personal exemptions for tax year 2025 remain at 0, as in tax year 2024. The elimination of the personal exemption was a provision in the TCJA. Itemized deductions. There is no limitation on itemized deductions for tax year 2025, as in tax year 2024 and preceding, to tax year 2018. The limitation on itemized deductions was eliminated by the TCJA. Lifetime learning credits. The modified adjusted gross income amount used by taxpayers to determine the reduction in the lifetime learning credit is not adjusted for inflation for taxable years beginning after Dec. 31, 2020. The lifetime learning credit is phased out for taxpayers with modified adjusted gross income in excess of $80,000 ($160,000 for joint returns). Be prepared for new and potential tax law changes To preserve and transfer significant wealth, it’s important to consider current tax laws and related sunset provisions and plan accordingly. Given the potential changes ahead, it’s essential to review how tax bracket adjustments and other changes affect your tax planning strategies. Learn how we can help you design a plan to grow and protect your wealth . Tags: Financial planning Investing Taxes Explore more 7 essential tax planning tips Proactive tax planning throughout the year may help you reduce your tax liabilities and minimize tax time surprises. Read more Put your taxes in perspective. A thoughtful approach to taxes and their impact can help keep your financial plan on track. Read more Find an advisor or banker Disclosures Start of disclosure content Investment and insurance products and services including annuities are: Not a deposit • Not FDIC insured • May lose value • Not bank guaranteed • Not insured by any federal government agency. U.S. Wealth Management – U.S. Bank is a marketing logo for U.S. Bank. Start of disclosure content U.S. Bank and its representatives do not provide tax or legal advice. Your tax and financial situation is unique. You should consult your tax and/or legal advisor for advice and information concerning your particular situation. The information provided represents the opinion of U.S. Bank and is not intended to be a forecast of future events or guarantee of future results. It is not intended to provide specific investment advice and should not be construed as an offering of securities or recommendation to invest. Not for use as a primary basis of investment decisions. Not to be construed to meet the needs of any particular investor. Not a representation or solicitation or an offer to sell/buy any security. Investors should consult with their investment professional for advice concerning their particular situation. U.S. Bank does not offer insurance products but may refer you to an affiliated or third party insurance provider. U.S. Bank is not responsible for and does not guarantee the products, services or performance of U.S. Bancorp Investments, Inc. Equal Housing Lender. Deposit products are offered by U.S. Bank National Association. Member FDIC. Mortgage, Home Equity and Credit products are offered by U.S. Bank National Association. Loan approval is subject to credit approval and program guidelines. Not all loan programs are available in all states for all loan amounts. Interest rates and program terms are subject to change without notice. Support Security Financial education Site map Careers Accessibility Online tracking & advertising Privacy Your privacy choices Cobrowse © 2025 U.S. Bank end of mainHunter Biden: What was he doing in China and Ukraine? Skip to content British Broadcasting Corporation Home News Sport Business Innovation Culture Arts Travel Earth Audio Video Live Home News Israel-Gaza War War in Ukraine US & Canada UK UK Politics England N. Ireland N. Ireland Politics Scotland Scotland Politics Wales Wales Politics Africa Asia China India Australia Europe Latin America Middle East In Pictures BBC InDepth BBC Verify Sport Business Executive Lounge Technology of Business Future of Business Innovation Technology Science & Health Artificial Intelligence AI v the Mind Culture Film & TV Music Art & Design Style Books Entertainment News Arts Arts in Motion Travel Destinations Africa Antarctica Asia Australia and Pacific Caribbean & Bermuda Central America Europe Middle East North America South America World’s Table Culture & Experiences Adventures The SpeciaList Earth Natural Wonders Weather & Science Climate Solutions Sustainable Business Green Living Audio Podcasts Radio Audio FAQs Video Live Live News Live Sport Home News Sport Business Innovation Culture Arts Travel Earth Audio Video Live Weather Newsletters Hunter Biden: What was he doing in China and Ukraine? 6 April 2021 Share Save Share Save Getty Images Vice-President Biden in 2016 with his son Hunter looking on Hunter Biden, second son of US President Joe Biden, is being investigated by the Justice Department over his finances including, according to US media reports, some of his business dealings in China. During the 2020 election campaign, he and his father were frequently accused by Donald Trump and his associates of wrongdoing in regards to China and Ukraine, allegations which they both denied. The New York Post reported on an alleged email in which an adviser from a Ukrainian energy company, Burisma, apparently thanked Hunter for inviting him to meet his father, Joe Biden. Asked about the allegations, Joe Biden told a reporter it was a "smear campaign". No criminal activity has been proven, and no evidence has emerged that Mr Biden did anything to intentionally benefit his son. In an interview with the BBC months after his father was sworn in as president, Hunter Biden defended his qualifications for the position at Burisma but added that, in retrospect, he had "missed... the perception that I would create". Claims of influence-peddling are common in Washington DC and Mr Trump's children have also been accused of conflicts of interest in lucrative business deals overseas. They, too, deny wrongdoing. What do we know about the federal investigation? The Justice Department is investigating Hunter Biden's finances including scrutinising some of his past Chinese business dealings and other transactions, a "person familiar with the matter" told The Associated Press in December . The tax investigation was launched in 2018 but Hunter Biden said he had learned about it for the first time in December 2020. Asked about the investigation by US broadcaster CBS this April, the president's son said: "I'm co-operating, completely. And I'm absolutely certain, 100% certain, that at the end of the investigation, that I will be cleared of any wrongdoing." What have the Bidens been accused of in China? The New York Post cited a purported email from Hunter Biden in August 2017 indicating he was receiving a $10m annual fee from a Chinese billionaire for "introductions alone", though it is unclear who was involved in the alleged introductions. Another purported email, which Fox News said it had confirmed, reportedly refers to a deal pursued by Hunter involving China's largest private energy firm. It is said to include a cryptic mention of "10 held by H for the big guy". Fox News cited unnamed sources as saying "the big guy" in the purported email was a reference to Joe Biden. This message is said to be from May 2017. Both emails would date from when the former US vice-president was a private citizen. A former business associate of Hunter Biden has come forward to say he can confirm the allegations. Tony Bobulinski told Fox News that, contrary to Joe Biden's statements that he had nothing to do with his son's business affairs, Hunter had "frequently referenced asking him for his sign-off or advice on various potential deals" in China. Mr Bobulinski, who is reportedly a US Navy veteran, separately told Fox News' Tucker Carlson that he had met on two occasions with Joe Biden to discuss business deals with China, the first time in May 2017 when Barack Obama's former vice-president was a private citizen. He says he asked Joe Biden's brother, James, whether the family was concerned about possible scrutiny of the former vice-president's involvement in a potential business deal with a Chinese entity. Mr Bobulinski told Fox News that James Biden had replied: "Plausible deniability." Mr Bobulinski was invited by Mr Trump to be his guest at the final presidential debate in Nashville, Tennessee on 22 October. What is known about Hunter's dealings in China? In 2013, Hunter flew aboard Air Force Two with his father, who was then vice-president, on an official visit to Beijing, where the younger Biden met investment banker Jonathan Li. Hunter told the New Yorker he had just met Mr Li for "a cup of coffee", but 12 days after the trip a private equity fund, BHR Partners, was approved by the Chinese authorities. Mr Li was chief executive and Hunter was a board member. He would hold a 10% stake. Getty Images Joe Biden walks out of Air Force Two with his granddaughter and son, Hunter Biden BHR is backed by some of China's largest state banks and by local governments, according to US media. Hunter Biden's lawyer said he had joined the board in an unpaid position "based on his interest in seeking ways to bring Chinese capital to international markets". His lawyer also said his client did not acquire his financial stake in BHR until 2017, after his father had left office in the US. Hunter resigned from the board of BHR in April 2020, but still held his 10% stake in BHR as of July this year, according to the company report. What did the New York Post say about Hunter Biden and Ukraine? The New York Post reported an email from April 2015, in which an adviser to Burisma, Vadym Pozharskyi, apparently thanked Hunter Biden for inviting him to meet his father in Washington. Hunter was a director on the board of Burisma - a Ukrainian-owned private energy company while his father was the Obama administration's pointman on US-Ukrainian relations. Hunter was one of several foreigners on its board. The New York Post article did not provide evidence that the meeting had ever taken place. The Biden election campaign said there was no record of any such meeting on the former vice-president's "official schedule" from the time. But in a statement to Politico , the campaign also acknowledged that Mr Biden could have had an "informal interaction" with the Burisma adviser that did not appear on his official schedule, though it said any such encounter would have been "cursory". "Investigations by the press, during impeachment, and even by two Republican-led Senate committees whose work was decried as 'not legitimate' and political by a GOP colleague, have all reached the same conclusion: that Joe Biden carried out official US policy toward Ukraine and engaged in no wrongdoing," said Andrew Bates, a spokesman for Mr Biden. What we know about Biden-Ukraine corruption claims Mr Biden's team has also decried the New York Post story as "Russian disinformation", though it did not say the emails were bogus. The New York Post article was shared by President Trump and his allies. Two of his former advisers, Steve Bannon and Rudy Giuliani, were involved in providing the story and the hard drive containing the alleged emails, to the newspaper. Mr Giuliani says the messages were found on a laptop that Hunter dropped off at a Delaware repair shop in April 2019. Sceptics have noted that Mr Giuliani travelled in December 2019 to Kyiv where he met Ukrainian lawmaker Andriy Derkach, whom the US Treasury has designated as a longtime Kremlin agent. Mr Giuliani has acknowledged trying dig up dirt on the Bidens in Ukraine. But the US Director of National Intelligence, John Ratcliffe, told Fox Business that the purported emails were not connected to a Russian disinformation effort. Other US media say they have been unable to verify the authenticity of the emails. Hunter has neither confirmed nor denied that he dropped off a laptop at the location. Hunter joined Burisma in 2014, and remained on the board until April 2019, when he decided to leave. Speaking to the BBC, he said Burisma had seen his name "as gold" and that it had played a large part in his appointment to the board. Twitter and Facebook's action over Joe Biden article reignites bias claims What are the Bidens accused of in Ukraine? Donald Trump and his allies accused Joe Biden of wrongdoing because he had pushed, while vice-president, for the Ukrainian government to fire its top prosecutor, who was investigating the company for which Hunter worked. In 2016, Joe Biden called for the dismissal of Ukrainian prosecutor Viktor Shokin, whose office had Burisma and other companies under investigation. However, other Western leaders and major bodies that give financial support to Ukraine also wanted the prosecutor dismissed because they believed he was not active enough in tackling corruption. What else has the Biden campaign said? Shortly before the final presidential debate last year, the Democrat's camp released a statement denying wrongdoing. "Joe Biden has never even considered being involved in business with his family, nor in any overseas business whatsoever," said the statement. "He has never held stock in any such business arrangements nor has any family member or any other person ever held stock for him. "What is true is that Tony Bobulinski admitted on the record to Breitbart that he is angry that he was *not* able to go into business with Hunter and James Biden [Joe Biden's brother]." What did this have to do with impeachment? In 2019, details emerged of a phone call Mr Trump, the then president, had made to the president of Ukraine, in which he had urged the Ukrainian leader to investigate the Bidens. President Trump's impeachment explained This led to charges by the Democrats that Mr Trump was trying to illegally pressure Ukraine to help damage his election rival, resulting in impeachment by the House of Representatives. Mr Trump denied he had done anything wrong, and he was later acquitted by the Republican-controlled US Senate. Getty Images President Trump holds a copy of The Washington Post the day after the US Senate acquitted him on two articles of impeachment Has anything been proven against the Bidens? While no criminal activity has been proven, it has raised questions about potential conflicts of interest. A senior State Department official raised such concerns as far back as 2015. Joe Biden's son defends foreign dealings US Republican lawmakers launched an investigation and found last year that Hunter's work for the Ukrainian firm had been "problematic" - but there wasn't evidence that US foreign policy was influenced by it. No criminal charges were proven against Burisma either. The company issued a statement in 2017 saying "all legal proceedings and pending criminal allegations" against it were closed. Last year, Yuriy Lutsenko, the prosecutor in Ukraine who succeeded Viktor Shokin, told the BBC that there was no reason to investigate the Bidens under Ukrainian law. There is nothing illegal about sitting on a board of a company whilst family members serve in government. Hunter Biden's lawyers said in statement in October 2019 that he had undertaken "these business activities independently. He did not believe it appropriate to discuss them with his father, nor did he." Hunter told the New Yorker magazine that on the only occasion he had mentioned Burisma: "Dad said, 'I hope you know what you are doing.'" Amid all the scrutiny, Joe Biden promised last year that if he was elected president, no-one in his family would hold a job or have a business relationship with a foreign corporation or foreign government. Impeachment of Donald Trump US election 2020 BBC Verify Hunter Biden Joe Biden Related Jeremy Bowen: Trump-Zelensky row signals looming crisis between Europe and US 1 Mar 2025 World 'The boss' featured at Trump hush-money trial 25 Apr 2024 US & Canada How did US impeachments go from rare to routine? 28 Sep 2023 US & Canada More 4 hrs ago Trump's former VP Mike Pence receives JFK Courage Award Pence defied calls by Donald Trump to overturn the result of the 2020 election, and was shunned by Republicans as a result. 4 hrs ago US & Canada 25 Apr 2025 What would it mean for Ukraine to temporarily give up land? As Ukraine reckons with the terms of a possible peace deal, BBC Verify asks what it could mean in practice. 25 Apr 2025 BBC Verify 16 Apr 2025 Watch: Biden attacks Trump in first speech since leaving White House The former US president says his successor has "done so much damage and so much destruction" in his first days in office. 16 Apr 2025 US & Canada 16 Apr 2025 Biden attacks Trump in first speech since leaving White House The ex-president uses the speech to criticise the Trump administration's cuts to the welfare agency. 16 Apr 2025 US & Canada 15 Apr 2025 Trump blames Zelensky for starting war after massive Russian attack The US president apportioned blame to Ukraine's leader hours after the deadliest strike on civilians this year. 15 Apr 2025 World British Broadcasting Corporation Home News Sport Business Innovation Culture Arts Travel Earth Audio Video Live Weather BBC Shop BritBox BBC in other languages Follow BBC on: Terms of Use About the BBC Privacy Policy Cookies Accessibility Help Contact the BBC Advertise with us Do not share or sell my info Contact technical support Copyright 2025 BBC. All rights reserved. The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites. Read about our approach to external linking.

Biden–Ukraine conspiracy theory - Wikipedia Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Background 2 Bribery allegation 3 Conspirators Toggle Conspirators subsection 3.1 Russian involvement 3.1.1 Ihor Kolesnikov 3.1.2 Oleksander Dubinsky 3.1.3 Andrii Derkach 3.1.4 Kostiantyn Kulyk 3.1.5 Dmytro Firtash 3.1.6 Konstantin Kilimnik 3.2 American media involvement 3.2.1 Peter Schweizer 3.2.2 John Solomon 3.2.3 Fox News 3.2.4 One America News Network 3.3 Trump campaign involvement 3.3.1 Trump's first impeachment 3.3.2 Rudy Giuliani 4 Subjects of the conspiracy Toggle Subjects of the conspiracy subsection 4.1 Viktor Shokin 4.2 Hunter Biden 5 Congressional investigations Toggle Congressional investigations subsection 5.1 Lev Parnas testimony 6 See also 7 References Toggle the table of contents Biden–Ukraine conspiracy theory 5 languages العربية Bahasa Indonesia Русский Српски / srpski Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read View source View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read View source View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Political conspiracy theory This article is about the conspiracy theory that the firing of Viktor Shokin was an attempt by Joe Biden to protect Hunter Biden. For the controversy surrounding Hunter Biden's laptop, see Hunter Biden laptop controversy . For allegations of corruption by the Bidens, see United States House Oversight Committee investigation into the Biden family . Viktor Shokin Joe Biden Hunter Biden Some of the primary subjects of the conspiracy theory The Biden–Ukraine conspiracy theory is a series of false allegations that Joe Biden , while he was vice president of the United States , improperly withheld a loan guarantee and took a bribe to pressure Ukraine into firing prosecutor general Viktor Shokin to prevent a corruption investigation of Ukrainian gas company Burisma and to protect his son Hunter Biden , who was on the Burisma board . [ 1 ] As part of efforts by Donald Trump [ 2 ] and his campaign in the Trump–Ukraine scandal , which led to Trump's first impeachment , these falsehoods were spread in an attempt to damage Joe Biden's reputation and chances during the 2020 presidential campaign , and later in an effort to impeach him. [ 3 ] Joe Biden followed State Department intentions when he withheld the loan guarantee to pressure Ukraine into removing the prosecutor, [ 4 ] [ 5 ] who was seen as corrupt and failing to clean up Ukrainian corruption, [ 6 ] in accordance with the official and bipartisan policy of the United States , the European Union , the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund . [ 7 ] [ 8 ] [ 9 ] A confidential informant told the FBI that Burisma's owner said he was coerced to pay bribes to both Bidens to ensure Shokin was fired, though the informant was indicted in 2024 on charges he had fabricated the account. United States intelligence community analysis released in March 2021 found that proxies of Russian intelligence promoted and laundered misleading or unsubstantiated narratives about the Bidens "to US media organizations, US officials, and prominent US individuals, including some close to former President Trump and his administration." [ 10 ] [ 11 ] [ 12 ] The New York Times reported in May 2021 that a federal criminal investigation was examining a possible role by current and former Ukrainian officials, including whether they used former Trump personal attorney Rudy Giuliani , who was the subject of a separate but related federal investigation, to spread unsubstantiated claims. [ 13 ] A joint investigation by two Republican Senate committees released in September 2020 found no evidence of wrongdoing by Joe Biden. A sweeping Republican House committee investigation of the Biden family has found no wrongdoing by December 2023. [ 14 ] [ 15 ] [ 16 ] [ 17 ] House Speaker Kevin McCarthy directed three committees to open a formal impeachment inquiry in September 2023, and on December 2 his successor Mike Johnson said he believed Republicans had enough votes in the House to initiate impeachment proceedings . The three committees released a report in August 2024 asserting Biden had "engaged in impeachable conduct," but they did not recommend proceeding to impeachment. [ 18 ] Background See also: Conspiracy theories related to the Trump–Ukraine scandal Since the Independence of Ukraine following the collapse of the Soviet Union , Russia has had a history of running direct and active measures to undermine the sovereignty of Ukraine. [ 19 ] This included placing operatives in the government, influencing elections, and encouraging corruption. [ 20 ] [ 21 ] [ 22 ] After the start of the Russo-Ukrainian War , when Russia invaded Crimea and Eastern Ukraine, Russia began to take active measures to influence presidential elections in the United States . [ 23 ] [ 24 ] Beginning in 2014, this included efforts to discredit Joe Biden . [ 25 ] The series of false allegations about Joe Biden and Burisma [ 25 ] emerged at a convergence of interest between Russian efforts to help Trump's candidacy, [ 26 ] operatives and supporters of the Trump campaign, [ 27 ] and media in the United States. [ 28 ] [ 29 ] The thesis of the false conspiracy theory asserts that Joe Biden sought the dismissal of a Ukrainian prosecutor to protect his son, [ 26 ] and that he did it in a quid pro quo manner by trading loan guarantees for the personal favor. This is in contrast to the attempted quid pro quo by President Trump, who unsuccessfully tried to pressure Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelenskyy in a quid pro quo manner to start a publicly announced investigation of Burisma and the Bidens in exchange for military aid and a visit to the White House. Trump's effort resulted in his first impeachment. [ 25 ] In January 2018, a videotaping by the Council on Foreign Relations shows Biden taking credit for withholding the loan guarantees to have the prosecutor fired. [ 30 ] His actions were implementations of bipartisan US policy rather than done for any of the reasons alleged in the conspiracy theory. [ 31 ] [ 32 ] Bribery allegation In June 2020, a confidential informant, later convicted for false statements to the FBI, [ 33 ] Alexander Smirnov , lied to the FBI that Burisma owner Mykola Zlochevsky had said he had been coerced into paying Hunter Biden a $5 million bribe, as well as a $5 million bribe to "another Biden," to ensure Shokin would be fired. The FBI memorialized Smirnov's lies in an FD-1023 form , which read in part: Zlochevsky said he had a total of "17 recordings" involving the Bidens; two of the recordings included Joe Biden, and the remaining 15 recordings only included Hunter Biden. [The informant] reiterated that, per Zlochevsky, these recordings evidence Zlochevsky was somehow coerced into paying the Bidens to ensure Ukraine Prosecutor General Viktor Shokin was fired. [ 4 ] [ 34 ] Smirnov also told the FBI that Zlochevsky said Burisma had hired Hunter Biden to "protect us, through his dad, from all kinds of problems." [ 35 ] The FD-1023 came to the attention of the Republican-controlled House Oversight Committee investigation of the Biden family in 2023, leading to allegations of bribery that contributed to the Republican-controlled House voting to initiate impeachment proceedings against President Biden in December 2023. Republican committee member Nancy Mace asserted in a September 2023 public hearing, "We already know the president took bribes from Burisma." [ 36 ] In February 2024, Smirnov was arrested by the FBI upon arriving in Las Vegas on a flight from an overseas location. He was indicted on charges that he had fabricated his account of conversations with Zlochevsky. The indictment asserted Smirnov appeared to have a political bias against Joe Biden, telling FBI handlers during the 2020 presidential campaign that he had evidence that would put Biden in jail. [ 35 ] [ 37 ] Days after the indictment, prosecutors said Smirnov had admitted Russian intelligence officials had passed a false story about Hunter Biden to him and Smirnov had been "actively peddling new lies that could impact US elections" since meeting with Russian agents in late 2023. Prosecutors also said Smirnov is a dual U.S. and Israeli citizen who should be detained pending trial; the presiding magistrate judge ordered him released provided he surrender his passports and wear a GPS monitor. [ 38 ] [ 39 ] In December 2024, Smirnov pleaded guilty to one count of lying to the FBI and was sentenced to six years in prison the following month. [ 40 ] [ 41 ] Conspirators The falsehoods about Hunter Biden were spread by possible Russian operatives in the Ukrainian parliament, [ 42 ] right-wing media supportive of Trump, [ 25 ] and members of the Trump campaign, such as Rudy Giuliani and Steve Bannon . [ 43 ] Russian involvement Russian involvement was coordinated by Russian GRU lieutenant general Vladimir Alekseyevin , his deputy Oleksiy Savin, and Ihor Kolesnikov. [ 44 ] They coordinated a network spreading the false allegations through Ukrainian lawmakers Oleksandr Dubinsky and Andrii Derkach , Prosecutor Kostiantyn Kulyk and businessmen Dmytro Firtash and Konstantin Kilimnik . [ 25 ] The three were given ten million dollars [ 45 ] and used corrupt access to the Ukrainian Parliament and connections to media and politicians in the United States to spread the falsehoods. [ 46 ] Dubinsky, Derkach and Kulyk were sanctioned by the U.S. government in the closing days of the Trump administration, and in November 2023 Ukrainian authorities indicted them on treason charges. [ 47 ] Ihor Kolesnikov Ihor Kolesnikov, a Soviet-era GRU officer, coordinated the election subversion network from Kyiv. [ 48 ] Kolesnikov would organize Press Conferences for Oleksander Dubinsky and Andri Derkach. He was sentenced to fifteen years for treason in May 2022. [ 48 ] Oleksander Dubinsky Oleksandr Dubinsky is a member of the Ukrainian Parliament who four years ago helped Rudy Giuliani in his attempts to find information in support of the false Biden-Ukraine conspiracy. Dubinsky is accused of treason for allegedly working to help Russia in its war against Ukraine. [ 45 ] Dubinsky held Press Conference with Andrii Derkach to spread the false rumors. [ 47 ] He also met with Rudy Giuliani in 2019 for the production of a falsified film about the conspiracy. [ 49 ] In May 2021 Dubinsky was sanctioned by the US Government, his assets frozen, and his YouTube channel shutdown. In November 2023 Oleksander Dubinsky was charged for carrying out subversive informational activities by publishing "fakes about the alleged interference of Ukrainian high-ranking officials" in the U.S. 2020 presidential elections. [ 48 ] Andrii Derkach Andrii Derkach is a former Ukrainian politician, now stripped of citizenship, [ 50 ] who is believed to have been an agent or asset of Russia. [ 51 ] He played a central role in spreading falsehoods about Biden and Ukraine. [ 25 ] Derkach released snippets of a supposed conversation between Joe Biden and Ukrainian President Poroshenko, in which Biden linked loan guarantees to the ouster of Viktor Shokin, the country's corrupt and ineffective prosecutor general. [ 5 ] The recordings, which were not verified as authentic and appeared to be heavily edited, [ 52 ] did not provide evidence to support the ongoing conspiracy theory that Biden wanted the prosecutor fired to protect his son. [ 53 ] In June 2020, Poroshenko denied that Joe Biden ever approached him about Burisma and characterized the recordings as fake. [ 54 ] [ 55 ] In September 2020, the United States Department of the Treasury sanctioned Derkach, stating he "has been an active Russian agent for over a decade, maintaining close connections with the Russian Intelligence Services". The Treasury Department added that Derkach "waged a covert influence campaign centered on cultivating false and unsubstantiated narratives concerning U.S. officials in the upcoming 2020 Presidential Election," including by the release of "edited audio tapes and other unsupported information with the intent to discredit U.S. officials". [ 56 ] [ 57 ] Kostiantyn Kulyk In 2019, as deputy prosecutor general. Mr Kulyk wrote a 2019 memo calling for an investigation into Hunter Biden's role on Burisma's board. [ 47 ] Later that year he had plans to meet Mr Giuliani to discuss the allegations in order to spread the false conspiracy. [ 58 ] Kulyk has been indicted on multiple corruption charges. [ 59 ] Kulyk, though, fled Ukraine after Russia's invasion in 2022 [ 47 ] and is also sanctioned by the United States for his role in the subversive activities. [ 60 ] Dmytro Firtash Dmytro Firtash was a middleman for Gazprom and connected to the Ukrainian government. [ 61 ] He has acknowledged that he was installed as a middleman by Russian mob boss Semion Mogilevich . [ 62 ] Since 2014 Firtash has faced bribery charges and fought extradition to the United States while he has been released on bail in Austria. He wired one million dollars to the wife of Lev Parnas , a former associate of Giuliani. He provided a now-discredited affidavit from Kulyk accusing Biden of wrongdoing. Trump and Giuliani associates Joe DiGenova and Victoria Toensing attempted to persuade Attorney General William Barr to drop charges against Firtash but failed. [ 62 ] Konstantin Kilimnik Konstantin Kilimnik oversaw a network of people working on behalf of the Russian Federal Security Service (FSB) to influence the 2020 elections. [ 63 ] Kilimnik had the single strongest ties, authorized by President Putin , [ 64 ] to the Trump administration in both 2016 and 2020 elections. [ 65 ] He organized Russia's media outreach campaigns to spread lies about Biden and corruption in Ukraine as part of Russia's efforts to help Trump. [ 66 ] [ 67 ] American media involvement American media organizations with ties to the Trump campaign were involved in the spread of the false allegations. [ 25 ] Specifically Peter Schweizer , [ 68 ] John Solomon , [ 25 ] Fox News , [ 69 ] and One America News Network [ 70 ] were essential in creating and disseminating the lies that built the background for this conspiracy theory. Peter Schweizer Peter Schweizer , editor-at-large at Breitbart News and president of the conservative Government Accountability Institute , was the first person to spread the falsehoods about Joe Biden and Burisma in his book "Secret Empires". [ 25 ] The plagiarized book [ 71 ] included a false story that on January 12, 2017, Joe Biden, who was then the vice-president, sought to end an investigation into Burisma to protect Hunter Biden, who had a profitable post on the board of Burisma, a Ukrainian gas company run by a shady oligarch. [ 25 ] Schweizer launched a media blitz in 2019 to help the conspiracy spread and appeared and wrote editorials repeating his lie in multiple news outlets. [ 72 ] This, in turn, helped to lead Trump allies in Ukraine [ 73 ] and Congress to promote the lie. [ 74 ] John Solomon Washington Post attributes John Solomon , formerly of The Hill , the most responsibility [ 75 ] for the spread of the untrue claims in U.S. media. [ 25 ] Beginning in the spring of 2019, Solomon published a series of editorials which The Hill notes are now part of Congressional inquiries due to their connection to the spreading of lies. Solomon relied heavily on Schweizer's book. [ 25 ] The story being pushed by Solomon had significant flaws, [ 75 ] including relying on a corrupt source who would not substantiate the claims. [ 76 ] In testimony before Congress, Alexander Vindman said Solomon's claims were "entirely made up in full cloth". [ 77 ] Media Matters reported in September 2023 that the previous month Solomon published a State Department briefing memo prepared for Joe Biden's December 2015 trip to Ukraine. The memo read, in part: There is wide agreement that anti-corruption must be at the top of this list, and that reforms must include an overhaul of the Prosecutor General's Office including removal of Prosecutor General Shokin, who is widely regarded as an obstacle to fighting corruption, if not a source of the problem. [ 78 ] Fox News Fox News was also involved in the spread of the falsehoods. [ 69 ] Fox ran at least twelve broadcasts about John Solomon's report about the Burisma probe. The false conspiracy theory was mentioned on Sean Hannity 's program, with him claiming Solomon had caught Joe Biden in an "international corruption scandal". [ 79 ] [ 80 ] One America News Network One America News Network (OANN) is a far-right , pro-Trump news outlet with reporters who also work for Russian news agencies, [ 70 ] and the network was essential to spreading lies about Biden and Burisma. [ 81 ] OANN produced a "documentary series intended to debunk the impeachment case", and an OANN crew traveled with Rudy Giuliani to Ukraine to gather information. [ 58 ] OANN later aired a misleading documentary about Biden and Burisma called " The Ukraine Hoax: Impeachment, Biden Cash, and Mass Murder " [ 82 ] produced by Michael Caputo , [ 81 ] a member of the Trump campaign, and Sergey Petrushin , a Russian living in Florida. The documentary used fake documents provided to Giuliani by Parnas on behalf of Andrii Derkach and Konstantin Kilimnik . [ 69 ] Following Caputo's work in spreading the falsehoods through OANN, Donald Trump made Caputo the assistant secretary of public affairs for the Department of Health and Human Services . Trump campaign involvement The Trump campaign's actions in spreading the conspiracy, especially the active engagement of Rudy Giuliani with possible Russian agents, [ 83 ] were highlighted during Donald Trump's first impeachment . [ 84 ] Trump's first impeachment Trump's first impeachment charge of abuse of power was triggered by a July 2019 phone call with Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelenskyy , in which then-President Trump unsuccessfully tried to pressure Zelenskyy in a quid pro quo manner to start a publicly announced investigation of Burisma and the Bidens in exchange for the release of congressionally mandated financial and military aid to Ukraine and the promise of a Trump–Zelenskyy meeting at the White House. [ 85 ] During the hearings and impeachment trial of President Trump in 2019–20, he and his allies repeatedly alleged that Joe Biden and his son had engaged in corrupt activities in Ukraine. [ 84 ] [ 86 ] Trump said he planned to make it a major issue during the 2020 United States presidential election , [ 87 ] while a Republican-controlled Senate committee carried out an investigation into the allegations in spring 2020. [ 88 ] The investigation by the Republican-controlled Senate Homeland Security and Finance Committees concluded in September 2020 that Hunter Biden " ' cashed in' on his father's name to close lucrative business deals around the world", but that there was no evidence of improper influence or wrongdoing by Joe Biden. [ 89 ] Rudy Giuliani Working together with Andrii Derkach (an active Russian agent), [ 56 ] Dmytro Firtash , and other individuals linked to Russian intelligence and organized crime, [ 90 ] [ 54 ] Trump's personal attorney, Rudy Giuliani , and his associates spearheaded an effort to gather information in Ukraine to advance the allegations, and Attorney General William Barr confirmed that the Justice Department had created an "intake process" to review Giuliani's findings. [ 91 ] In late 2019, it was revealed that the United States Attorney for the Southern District of New York , which Giuliani had once led, was investigating him for multiple felonies relating to his activities in Ukraine. [ 92 ] [ 93 ] Intelligence officials warned Ron Johnson , the chairman of the Senate committee investigating the Bidens, that he risked spreading Russian disinformation. [ 94 ] The Washington Post reported in October 2020 that American intelligence agencies warned the White House in 2019 that Giuliani was the target of a Russian influence operation, and National Security Advisor Robert O'Brien warned President Trump about accepting what Giuliani told him. While monitoring Russian assets, U.S. intelligence recorded Giuliani communicating with them. [ 95 ] According to officials interviewed by The Daily Beast , then-National Security Advisor John Bolton told his staff not to meet with Giuliani, as did his successor Robert C. O'Brien, because Bolton had been informed that Giuliani was spreading conspiracy theories that aligned with Russian interests in disrupting the 2020 election. These officials were also concerned that Giuliani would be used as a conduit for disinformation, including "leaks" of emails that would mix genuine with forged material to implicate Hunter Biden in corrupt dealings. [ 96 ] Interviewed by The Daily Beast, Giuliani would later declare that Derkach's being sanctioned was the result of a conspiracy led by George Soros and that "the chance that Derkach is a Russian spy is no better than 50/50". [ 97 ] In October 2020, during the last weeks of the presidential campaign, the New York Post published an article, with the involvement of Donald Trump's personal attorney Giuliani and former chief strategist Steve Bannon , about a laptop belonging to Hunter Biden . The laptop contained an email, the authenticity of which was later verified by The Washington Post in 2022, [ 98 ] showing what the New York Post characterized as a "meeting" between Joe Biden and Vadym Pozharskyi, a Burisma advisor, in 2015, though that characterization was disputed by witnesses. [ 5 ] The article's veracity was strongly questioned by most mainstream media outlets, analysts and intelligence officials, due to the chain of custody of the laptop and its contents, and suspicion that it may have been part of a disinformation campaign. [ 99 ] [ 100 ] [ 101 ] A Republican activist delivered a portable drive to the Washington Post and stated that the device contained data copied from the laptop. The Post confirmed that some of the materials provided to them were genuine, but could not confirm that the materials on the portable drive came from the purported laptop; the Post also concluded that most of the data could not be verified and fake material may have been mixed in with it. [ 98 ] Hunter Biden said that it is possible the laptop could be his. [ 102 ] [ 103 ] Ukrainian businessman Hares Youssef told The Times that an associate of Dmytro Firtash asked Youssef to lie about Hunter Biden's business dealings to damage Joe Biden's presidential campaign, in exchange for a United States visa. [ 104 ] Subjects of the conspiracy The false allegations asserted that Joe Biden asked for the dismissal of Viktor Shokin to cover up crimes by his son Hunter Biden. [ 25 ] Viktor Shokin Viktor Shokin was appointed to the position of Prosecutor General of Ukraine by Ukrainian president Petro Poroshenko , to whom he was loyal. Due to his own corruption and failures to do his job to clean up corruption, representatives of the EU , the United States , the World Bank , and International Monetary Fund , [ 6 ] pressed Poroshenko for his removal. [ 105 ] In March 2016 testimony to the Senate Foreign Relations Committee , former ambassador to Ukraine John E. Herbst stated, "By late fall of 2015, the EU and the United States joined the chorus of those seeking Mr. Shokin's removal" and that Joe Biden "spoke publicly about this before and during his December visit to Kyiv". During the same hearing, assistant secretary of state Victoria Nuland stated, "we have pegged our next $1 billion loan guarantee, first and foremost, to having a rebooting of the reform coalition so that we know who we are working with, but secondarily, to ensuring that the prosecutor general's office gets cleaned up." [ 8 ] An overwhelming majority vote in the Ukrainian Parliament in March 2016 led to Shokin's removal from office [ 106 ] after an investigation into extortion of another company led to associates who were found in possession of diamonds, cash and other valuables, [ 107 ] as well as documents and passports belonging to Shokin. [ 108 ] In an August 2023 Fox News interview, Shokin said he was fired as prosecutor general "at the insistence of then-Vice President [Biden] because I was investigating Burisma." One month later, Poroshenko was asked on Fox News for his reaction to Shokin's assertion. Poroshenko responded: First of all, this is a completely crazy person. There is something wrong with him. Second, there is not one single word of truth. And third, I hate the idea to make any comments and to make any intervention in an American election. We have very much enjoyed the bipartisan support, and please, do not use such a person like Shokin to undermine the trust between bipartisan support and Ukraine. The Fox News interviewer responded, "Okay, so that is not true. He didn't get fired because of Joe Biden." Poroshenko confirmed this, adding Shokin was fired by the Ukrainian parliament "for his own statement" and "he played a very dirty game unfortunately." [ 109 ] [ 110 ] Hunter Biden Hunter Biden is a lawyer whose career previously included a period as an executive vice president at MBNA and three years at the United States Department of Commerce . He then worked as a lobbyist until 2006, when George W. Bush appointed him to the board of directors of Amtrak . Hunter Biden resigned from Amtrak in February 2009, shortly after the inauguration of Barack Obama , when his father Joe Biden became vice-president. He resumed lobbying, and was counsel at the law firm Boies Schiller Flexner LLP , until the Ukrainian oil and gas firm Burisma Holdings appointed him to its board of directors in April 2014. [ 111 ] As Hunter Biden had no prior experience in Ukraine or the energy sector, some viewed this as a likely attempt to buy influence via his father, though Hunter Biden was hired to conduct general corporate consulting rather than to provide energy expertise. [ 112 ] Hunter Biden's employment was described by some as a potential conflict of interest , and advisors to the Obama administration considered the situation awkward. [ 113 ] Former Politico reporter Marc Caputo said in January 2025 that in 2019 the campaign of a rival to Biden for the Democratic nomination for the 2020 presidential election gave him opposition research on Burisma. "That story was killed by the editors, and they gave no explanation for that either", he recalled, citing it and orders to not report on the laptop as among examples of "dumb decisions of cowardly editors" regarding Hunter Biden. [ 114 ] Congressional investigations After Republicans took control of the House in January 2023, three House committees initiated investigations into Joe Biden, his family, and the Justice Department. In September 2023, House Speaker Kevin McCarthy authorized the committees to open a formal impeachment inquiry , to be led by James Comer , chairman of the House investigation into the Biden family . McCarthy had days earlier said that he would hold a full House vote to authorize an inquiry. [ 115 ] The Washington Post reported that during a November 7 luncheon with the Republican Governance Group , McCarthy's successor Mike Johnson indicated there was insufficient evidence to initiate formal impeachment proceedings . [ 116 ] Johnson said on December 2 that he believed he had enough House votes to continue to impeachment proceedings, as Republicans said a vote might be held within days, though they acknowledged they had not found evidence of misconduct by the president. [ 117 ] [ 118 ] [ 17 ] Lev Parnas testimony At the invitation of committee Democrats, on March 20, 2024, Parnas testified before the Republican-controlled House Oversight Committee investigation into the Biden family that was pursuing the impeachment of President Joe Biden . [ 119 ] [ 120 ] [ 121 ] Parnas stated he was tasked by Giuliani with "finding dirt on the Bidens" to "spread misinformation about them" but he was unable to find evidence of Biden corruption in Ukraine. [ 122 ] He testified, in part: [ 123 ] The American people have been lied to, by Donald Trump, Rudy Giuliani and various cohorts of individuals in government and media positions. They created falsehoods to serve their own interests knowing it would undermine the strength of our nation ... Congressman Pete Sessions , then-Congressman Devin Nunes , Senator Ron Johnson and many others understood they were pushing a false narrative. The same goes for John Solomon , Sean Hannity and media personnel, particularly with Fox News , who used this narrative to manipulate the public ahead of the 2020 elections. Sadly, they are still doing this today as we approach the 2024 elections ... The only information ever pushed on the Bidens and Ukraine has come from one source and one source only: Russia and Russian agents. See also Impeachment inquiry into Joe Biden Russia investigation origins counter-narrative Russian interference in the 2020 United States elections Trump–Ukraine scandal#Ukraine and the Bidens United States House Oversight Committee investigation into the Biden family Weiss special counsel investigation References ^ Multiple sources: Caldera, Camille (October 21, 2020). "Fact check: Biden leveraged $1B in aid to Ukraine to oust corrupt prosecutor, not to help his son" . USA Today . Retrieved August 18, 2021 . Based on our research, the claim that Joe Biden threatened to withhold $1 billion from Ukraine to save his son's job is FALSE. Alba, Davey ; Thompson, Stuart A. (February 25, 2022). " 'I'll Stand on the Side of Russia': Pro-Putin Sentiment Spreads Online" . The New York Times . ISSN 0362-4331 . Retrieved April 6, 2022 . Plokhy, Serhii ; Sarotte, M. E. (2020). "The Shoals of Ukraine: Where American Illusions and Great-Power Politics Collide" . Foreign Affairs . 99 : 81. Lawler, Dave (October 2, 2019). "Fact check: What Joe and Hunter Biden actually did in Ukraine" . Axios . Retrieved August 18, 2021 . False: Biden pushed for Shokin's ouster to protect his son. Kessler, Glenn (September 27, 2019). "A quick guide to Trump's false claims about Ukraine and the Bidens" . The Washington Post . Archived from the original on October 20, 2020 . Retrieved August 18, 2021 . Trump has falsely claimed that Biden in 2015 pressured the Ukrainian government to fire Viktor Shokin, the top Ukrainian prosecutor, because he was investigating Ukraine's largest private gas company, Burisma, which had added Biden's son, Hunter, to its board in 2014. Bevan, Matt (January 14, 2021). "Joe Biden and Hunter Biden have been accused of corruption, but there's good reason to be sceptical" . Australian Broadcasting Corporation . Retrieved August 18, 2021 . To begin with, it must be noted that the central premise of the stories is false. Sherman, Amy (October 11, 2019). "Donald Trump ad misleads about Joe Biden, Ukraine and the prosecutor" . PolitiFact . Retrieved August 18, 2021 . Kiely, Eugene (October 15, 2020). "Trump Revives False Narrative on Biden and Ukraine" . FactCheck.org . Archived from the original on October 17, 2020 . Retrieved October 17, 2020 . Hjelmgaard, Kim (October 11, 2019). "Trump's conspiracy theories thrive in Ukraine, where a young democracy battles corruption and distrust" . USA Today . Archived from the original on January 21, 2020 . Retrieved October 17, 2020 . Pilkington, Ed (September 30, 2019). "Five fantasies Trump is pushing about the Ukraine scandal – and the truth" . The Guardian . Archived from the original on October 1, 2019 . Retrieved December 17, 2019 . Timm, Jane C. (October 7, 2019). "Trump is pushing a baseless conspiracy about the Bidens and China. Here's what we know" . NBC News . Archived from the original on May 3, 2020 . Retrieved December 17, 2019 . Collins, Sean (September 23, 2019). "The facts behind Trump's bogus accusations about Biden and Ukraine" . Vox . Archived from the original on December 18, 2019 . Retrieved December 17, 2019 . Mayer, Jane (October 4, 2019). "The Invention of the Conspiracy Theory on Biden and Ukraine" . The New Yorker . Archived from the original on January 18, 2020 . Retrieved December 9, 2019 . Collins, Ben; Zadrozny, Brandy (November 20, 2019). "As Sondland testified, a misleading Ukraine story spread among conservatives on social media" . NBC News . Archived from the original on November 21, 2019 . Retrieved November 21, 2019 . Prokop, Andrew (December 13, 2023). "Republicans' thin corruption case against Joe Biden, explained" . Vox . CHS reiterated that, per Zlochevsky, these recordings evidence Zlochevsky was somehow coerced into paying the Bidens to ensure Ukraine Prosecutor General Viktor Shokin was fired ^ Kessler, Glenn (September 27, 2019). "A quick guide to Trump's false claims about Ukraine and the Bidens" . The Washington Post . Archived from the original on October 20, 2020 . Retrieved August 18, 2021 . Trump has falsely claimed that Biden in 2015 pressured the Ukrainian government to fire Viktor Shokin, the top Ukrainian prosecutor, because he was investigating Ukraine's largest private gas company, Burisma, which had added Biden's son, Hunter, to its board in 2014. ^ Goldman, Adam (October 22, 2020). "What We Know and Don't About Hunter Biden and a Laptop" . The New York Times . Archived from the original on October 23, 2020 . Retrieved October 23, 2020 . ^ a b Prokop, Andrew (September 28, 2023). "Republicans' thin corruption case against Joe Biden, explained" . Vox . There is wide agreement that anti-corruption must be at the top of this list, and that reforms must include an overhaul of the Prosecutor General's Office including removal of Prosecutor General Shokin, who is widely regarded as an obstacle to fighting corruption, if not a source of the problem ^ a b c Kessler, Glenn (October 15, 2020). "Hunter Biden's alleged laptop: an explainer" . The Washington Post . Archived from the original on October 15, 2020 . Retrieved October 15, 2020 . ^ a b Blake, Aaron (January 27, 2020). "The Bidens, Burisma and impeachment, explained" . The Washington Post . Archived from the original on October 16, 2020 . Retrieved October 18, 2020 . ^ Blake, Aaron (September 23, 2020). "GOP's Hunter Biden report doesn't back up Trump's actual conspiracy theory — or anything close to it" . The Washington Post . Archived from the original on September 24, 2020 . Retrieved October 17, 2020 . ^ a b "Ukrainian Reforms Two Years After the Maidan Revolution and the Russian Invasion Hearing" . United States Senate Committee on Foreign Relations . United States Government Publishing Office . March 15, 2016. Archived from the original on February 26, 2022 . Retrieved August 2, 2023 . ^ Kaczynski, Andrew; Steck, Em (October 3, 2019). "Republican senators echoed Biden in urging Ukrainian president to reform prosecutor general's office" . CNN . ^ Cohen, Zachary; Cohen, Marshall; Polantz, Katelyn (March 16, 2021). "US intelligence report says Russia used Trump allies to influence 2020 election with goal of 'denigrating' Biden" . CNN . Retrieved March 18, 2021 . ^ "Foreign Threats to the 2020 US Federal Elections" (PDF) . National Intelligence Council . March 10, 2021 . Retrieved April 14, 2022 . ^ Matishak, Martin (March 16, 2021). "Russia stoked Ukraine allegations, used Trump allies to undermine Biden, U.S. intel agencies say" . Politico . Retrieved April 14, 2022 . ^ Rashbaum, William K.; Protess, Ben; Vogel, Kenneth P. ; Hong, Nicole (May 27, 2021). "Prosecutors Investigating Whether Ukrainians Meddled in 2020 Election" . The New York Times . Retrieved June 12, 2021 . ^ Fandos, Nicholas (November 7, 2020). "Republican Inquiry Finds No Evidence of Wrongdoing by Biden" . The New York Times . ^ Demirjian, Karoun (July 4, 2023). "Republicans Are Divided on Impeaching Biden as Panel Begins New Inquiry" . The New York Times . ^ Otten, Tori (September 12, 2023). "McCarthy Launches Biden Impeachment Inquiry—With Zero Evidence" . The New Republic . Retrieved January 29, 2024 . ^ a b Fitzpatrick, Sarah; Shabad, Rebecca (December 1, 2023). "House GOP chairmen accuse Hunter Biden of seeking special treatment in impeachment probe" . NBC News . However, Republicans have admitted that they haven't found evidence of wrongdoing by the president. ^ Grayer, Annie; Foran, Clare; Cohen, Marshall; Williams, Michael (August 19, 2024). "GOP-led committees release Biden impeachment report without formally recommending the House move forward with impeachment" . CNN. ^ Giles, Kier (2023). Russia's War on Everybody . London, UK; New York, NY: Bloomsburg. p. 67. ISBN 978-1-3502-5508-1 . ^ A'Beckett, Ludmilla (2013). "Strategies to Discredit Opponents: Russian Presentations of Events in Countries of the Former Soviet Union" . Psychology of Language and Communication . 17 (2): 133– 156. doi : 10.2478/plc-2013-0009 . S2CID 48066635 . ^ Badawy, Adam; Addawood, Aseel; Lerman, Kristina; Ferrara, Emilio (2019). "Characterizing the 2016 Russian IRA influence campaign". Social Network Analysis and Mining . 9 . arXiv : 1812.01997 . doi : 10.1007/s13278-019-0578-6 . S2CID 256091225 . ^ Boyte, KJ (2017). "An Analysis of the Social-Media Technology, Tactics, and Narratives Used to Control Perception in the Propaganda War over Ukraine". Journal of Information Warfare . 16 (1): 88– 111. JSTOR 26502878 . ^ Golovchenko, Yevgeniy; Buntain, Cody; Eady, Gregory; Brown, Megan A.; Tucker, Joshua A. (2020). "Cross-Platform State Propaganda: Russian Trolls on Twitter and YouTube during the 2016 U.S. Presidential Election". The International Journal of Press/Politics . 25 (3): 357– 389. doi : 10.1177/1940161220912682 . S2CID 218809071 . ^ Suk, Jiyoun; Lukito, Josephine; Su, Min-Hsin; Kim, Sang Jung; Tong, Chau; Sun, Zhongkai; Sarma, Prathusha (2022). "Do I sound American? How message attributes of IRA disinformation relate to Twitter engagement" . Computational Communication Research . 4 (2): 590– 628. doi : 10.5117/CCR2022.2.008.SUK . S2CID 252602333 . ^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m Mayer, Jane (October 4, 2019). "The Invention of the Conspiracy Theory on Biden and Ukraine" . The New Yorker . Archived from the original on January 18, 2020 . Retrieved December 9, 2019 . ^ a b Bastos, Marco; Farkas, Johan (July 2019). " 'Donald Trump Is My President!': The Internet Research Agency Propaganda Machine" . Social Media + Society . 5 (3). doi : 10.1177/2056305119865466 . hdl : 2043/29693 . ISSN 2056-3051 . S2CID 181681781 . ^ Bardella, Kurt (May 20, 2020). "Opinion | Republicans are doing Trump's election dirty work — starting with Hunter Biden" . NBC News . Retrieved June 5, 2023 . ^ Oates, Sarah; Gurevich, Olya; Walker, Christopher; Deibler, Danielle; Anderson, Jesse (September 8, 2020). "Sharing a Playbook?: The Convergence of Russian and U.S. Narratives about Joe Biden" . APSA Preprints . doi : 10.33774/apsa-2020-v9pgw . S2CID 225285388 . Retrieved June 5, 2023 . ^ Alba, Davey (October 29, 2019). "Debunking 4 Viral Rumors About the Bidens and Ukraine" . The New York Times . ISSN 0362-4331 . Retrieved June 5, 2023 . ^ "Foreign Affairs Issue Launch with Former Vice President Joe Biden" . Council on Foreign Relations . January 23, 2018 . Retrieved May 1, 2023 . ^ Kessler, Glenn; Rizzo, Salvador; Kelly, Meg (September 30, 2020). "Fact-checking the first Trump-Biden presidential debate" . The Washington Post . ^ Kaczynski, Andrew ; Steck, Em (October 3, 2019). "Republican senators echoed Biden in urging Ukrainian president to reform prosecutor general's office" . CNN . Retrieved April 14, 2022 . ^ Legare, Robert; Fitzgerald, Elli (December 16, 2024). "Ex-FBI informant Alexander Smirnov pleads guilty to lying about the Bidens - CBS News" . www.cbsnews.com . Retrieved February 18, 2025 . ^ "FD-1023 of Alexander Smirnov" (PDF) . Senator Chuck Grassley. June 30, 2020. ^ a b Lindsay Whitehurst; Lisa Mascaro (February 15, 2024). "FBI informant charged with lying about Joe and Hunter Biden's ties to Ukrainian energy company" . Associated Press . ^ Dale, Daniel; Cohen, Marshall; Grayer, Annie (September 28, 2023). "Fact check: Republicans make false, misleading claims at first Biden impeachment inquiry hearing" . CNN . Retrieved June 6, 2024 . ^ Thrush, Glenn (February 15, 2024). "Ex-F.B.I. Informant Is Charged With Lying Over Bidens' Role in Ukraine Business" . The New York Times . ^ Rabinowitz, Hannah; Mossburg, Cheri (February 20, 2024). "Indicted ex-FBI informant told investigators he got Hunter Biden dirt from Russian intelligence officials" . CNN . Retrieved June 6, 2024 . ^ Lucas, Ryan (February 10, 2024). "Ex-FBI source charged with Biden lies is tied to Russian intelligence, prosecutors say" . National Public Radio. ^ Richer, Alanna Durkin (December 12, 2024). "Ex-FBI informant accused of lying about Bidens agrees to plead guilty to federal charges" . Associated Press . Retrieved December 15, 2024 . ^ Cohen, Marshall (January 8, 2025). "Ex-FBI informant behind fake Biden-Ukraine bribery allegations sentenced to 6 years in prison" . CNN. ^ Sauliuc, Adriana (March 2021). "Russia's Disinformation Campaign In The Time Of COVID-19 Pandemic" . Romanian Military Thinking . 2021 (1): 22– 33. doi : 10.55535/rmt.2021.1.02 . ISSN 1841-4451 . S2CID 259031527 . ^ Schlesinger, Robert (October 15, 2020). "Trump's tries at an October surprise show how divorced from reality he is" . NBC News . Retrieved June 5, 2023 . ^ Melkozerova, Veronika (November 13, 2023). "Ukraine charges Rudy Giuliani's top local ally with Moscow-linked treason" . Politico . Retrieved November 23, 2023 . ^ a b Stern, David (November 14, 2023). "Ukrainian lawmaker with ties to Giuliani arrested on treason charges" . Washington Post . Retrieved November 22, 2023 . ^ Goldberg, Michelle (October 20, 2020). "Is the Trump Campaign Colluding With Russia Again?" . Opinion. The New York Times . ISSN 0362-4331 . Retrieved June 5, 2023 . ^ a b c d McCausland, Phil (November 15, 2023). "Ukraine charges officials tied to Hunter Biden probe and Russia" . Retrieved November 23, 2023 . ^ a b c "Ukrainian lawmaker Oleksandr Dubinsky arrested for treason The deputy is suspected of working for Russia and interfering in U.S. elections" . Meduza . Retrieved November 23, 2023 . ^ Walker, Shaun (November 14, 2023). "Ukraine MP linked to Rudy Giuliani charged with colluding with Russia" . The Guardian . ISSN 0261-3077 . Retrieved November 23, 2023 . ^ Kochubey, Bogdan (January 11, 2023). "Zelenskiy strips Putin ally Medvedchuk, three others of Ukrainian citizenship" . Reuters . Retrieved June 4, 2023 . . ^ Levin, Dov H. (March 7, 2023). "Is sunlight the best counterintelligence technique? The effectiveness of covert operation exposure in blunting the Russian intervention in the 2020 U.S. election" . Intelligence and National Security . 38 (5): 816– 834. doi : 10.1080/02684527.2023.2181923 . ISSN 0268-4527 . S2CID 257421505 . ^ Sonne, Paul; Helderman, Rosalind S. (May 19, 2020). "Ukrainian lawmaker releases leaked phone calls of Biden and Poroshenko" . The Washington Post . Archived from the original on June 30, 2020 . Retrieved October 17, 2020 . ^ Sonne, Paul; Helderman, Rosalind S. ; Dawsey, Josh ; Stern, David L. (June 30, 2020). "Hunt for Biden tapes in Ukraine by Trump allies revives prospect of foreign interference" . The Washington Post . Archived from the original on July 1, 2020 . Retrieved June 30, 2020 . ^ a b Bertrand, Natasha (June 26, 2020). "Senate panel demands testimony from ex-Obama officials in revived Biden probe" . Politico . Archived from the original on June 28, 2020 . Retrieved June 29, 2020 . ^ Seddiq, Oma (June 21, 2020). "Former Ukrainian president says Biden never pressed him on Burisma" . Politico . Archived from the original on June 30, 2020 . Retrieved June 29, 2020 . ^ a b Cohen, Zachary; Atwood, Kylie; Cohen, Marshall (September 10, 2020). "Vowing crackdown on Russian meddling, US sanctions Ukrainian lawmaker who worked with Giuliani to smear Biden" . CNN . Archived from the original on October 31, 2020 . Retrieved October 17, 2020 . ^ "Treasury Sanctions Russia-Linked Election Interference Actors" . United States Department of the Treasury . September 10, 2020. Archived from the original on September 11, 2020 . Retrieved October 17, 2020 . ^ a b Vogel, Kenneth P.; Novak, Benjamin (December 4, 2019). "Giuliani, Facing Scrutiny, Travels to Europe to Interview Ukrainians" . The New York Times . ISSN 0362-4331 . Retrieved June 6, 2023 . ^ Kramer, Andrew E.; Schwirtz, Michael (October 15, 2019). "The Ukrainian Prosecutor Behind the Dossier Targeting Hunter Biden" . The New York Times . ISSN 0362-4331 . Retrieved November 23, 2023 . ^ Hodge, Nathan; Butenko, Victoria; Cohen, Marshall (November 16, 2023). "Ukraine implicates three Giuliani allies in plot to help Russia meddle in 2020 US election" . CNN . Retrieved November 23, 2023 . ^ Myers, Steven Lee; Kramer, Andrew E. (August 1, 2016). "How Paul Manafort Wielded Power in Ukraine Before Advising Donald Trump" . The New York Times . ISSN 0362-4331 . Retrieved November 23, 2023 . ^ a b Winter, Tom; Dilanian, Ken; De Luce, Dan (January 25, 2020). "The oligarch linked to $1 million loan to Giuliani ally has a shadowy past" . NBC News . Retrieved November 23, 2023 . ^ Draper, Robert (April 11, 2022). " 'This Was Trump Pulling a Putin' " . The New York Times . ISSN 0362-4331 . Retrieved June 5, 2023 . ^ Barnes, Julian E. (March 16, 2021). "Russian Interference in 2020 Included Influencing Trump Associates, Report Says" . The New York Times . ISSN 0362-4331 . Retrieved June 5, 2023 . ^ Jalonick, Mary Clare; Balsamo, Michael (April 20, 2021). "Intel officials say Russia boosting Trump candidacy" . Associated Press . Retrieved June 5, 2023 . ^ Barnes, Julian E.; Rosenberg, Matthew (November 22, 2019). "Charges of Ukrainian Meddling? A Russian Operation, U.S. Intelligence Says" . The New York Times . ISSN 0362-4331 . Retrieved June 5, 2023 . ^ Eckel, Mike (December 8, 2022). "Five Things To Know About The U.S. Intelligence Report On Russian Election Interference" . Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty . Retrieved June 5, 2023 . ^ Davies, Dave (October 9, 2019). "How A Political Hit Job Backfired, And Led To Trump's Impeachment Peril" . NPR Fresh Air . Retrieved June 6, 2023 . ^ a b c Vicens, AJ; Friedman, Dan (March 16, 2021). "Russia worked to boost Trump in 2020—with help from Giuliani, Fox News, and OANN" . Mother Jones . Retrieved June 6, 2023 . ^ a b Dovere, Edward-Isaac (June 11, 2020). "Is OAN the Leading Edge of Russian Misinformation?" . The Atlantic . Archived from the original on September 29, 2020 . Retrieved June 6, 2023 . ^ Markay, Lachlan (October 3, 2019). "Book Alleging Biden Corruption in Ukraine Lifted Passages From Wikipedia" . The Daily Beast . Retrieved June 6, 2023 . ^ Hagle, Courtney; Lewis, Bobby (September 23, 2019). "Debunking lies about Trump, Biden, Ukraine, and the whistleblower" . Media Matters for America . Retrieved June 6, 2023 . ^ Shuster, Simon (November 19, 2019). "Trump's Call For Investigations Finds New Support Among Russian Allies in Ukraine" . Time . Retrieved June 6, 2023 . ^ Schneider, Spencer (2021). "Money, Power, and Radical Honesty: A Look At Members of Congress' Use of Information for Financial Gain" . SSRN Electronic Journal . doi : 10.2139/ssrn.3951560 . ISSN 1556-5068 . S2CID 244460392 . ^ a b Farhi, Paul (September 28, 2019). "How a conservative columnist helped push a flawed Ukraine narrative" . Washington Post . ISSN 0190-8286 . Retrieved June 6, 2023 . ^ Mackinnon, Amy; Standish, Reid (September 26, 2019). "How a D.C. News Site Amplified Dubious Ukraine Claims" . Foreign Policy . Retrieved June 6, 2023 . ^ Kalmbacher, Colin (November 8, 2019). "Top Takeaways from Fiona Hill, Alexander Vindman Transcripts" . Law & Crime . Retrieved June 6, 2023 . ^ Gertz, Matt (September 18, 2023). "John Solomon inadvertently detonated the House impeachment case" . Media Matters for America . Retrieved September 19, 2023 . There is wide agreement that anti-corruption must be at the top of this list, and that reforms must include an overhaul of the Prosecutor General's Office including removal of Prosecutor General Shokin, who is widely regarded as an obstacle to fighting corruption, if not a source of the problem. ^ Ecarma, Caleb (October 21, 2020). "Sean Hannity Is Still Trying to Make Hunter Biden's Emails a Thing" . Vanity Fair . Retrieved September 3, 2023 . ^ Gertz, Matt (September 26, 2019). "Timeline: How Trump allies and propagandists teamed up to try to smear Biden over Ukraine" . Media Matters for America . Retrieved September 3, 2023 . ^ a b Sheth, Sonam (March 17, 2021). "Russian proxies 'helped produce a documentary that aired on a US television network' last year, intelligence report says" . Business Insider . Retrieved June 6, 2023 . ^ Stone, Ken (March 17, 2021). "San Diego's OAN Had Role in Russian Efforts to Sway Election, Intelligence Report Hints" . Times of San Diego . Retrieved June 6, 2023 . ^ Rawnsley, Adam (December 7, 2022). "Rudy Giuliani's Russian Spy Pal Charged With Money Laundering" . Rolling Stone . Retrieved June 5, 2023 . ^ a b Santucci, Jeanine; Today, Usa (September 25, 2019). " 'I would like you to do us a favor.' What Trump and Zelensky said in their July 25 phone call" . USA TODAY . Retrieved August 1, 2021 . ^ Sheth, Sonam (March 19, 2022). "Marie Yovanovitch says Rudy Giuliani was Trump's 'personal dirt-digger' and corrupt Ukrainians used him to spread 'lies and half-truths' in the US" . Business Insider . Retrieved March 20, 2022 . Trump tried to "pressure the Ukrainian president into publicly announcing investigations targeting the Bidens while withholding vital military aid and a White House meeting." ^ Edelman, Adam (January 27, 2020). "Trump impeachment defense team turns attention to Bidens, Burisma" . NBC News . Archived from the original on October 16, 2020 . Retrieved October 17, 2020 . ^ Chalfant, Morgan (March 4, 2020). "Trump says Biden Ukraine dealings will be a 'major' campaign issue" . The Hill . Archived from the original on October 21, 2020 . Retrieved October 17, 2020 . ^ Fandos, Nicholas (May 20, 2020). "Senate Panel, Urged On by Trump, Subpoenas Biden-Related Material" . The New York Times . Archived from the original on July 28, 2020 . Retrieved October 17, 2020 . ^ Fandos, Nicholas (September 23, 2020). "Republican Inquiry Finds No Evidence of Wrongdoing by Biden" . The New York Times . Archived from the original on September 24, 2020. ^ Baker, Stephanie; Reznik, Irina (October 18, 2019). "To Win Giuliani's Help, Oligarch's Allies Pursued Biden Dirt" . Bloomberg News . Archived from the original on October 19, 2019 . Retrieved October 19, 2019 . ^ Shortell, David (February 10, 2020). "Barr confirms Justice Department is receiving Giuliani information about Ukraine" . CNN . Archived from the original on October 26, 2020 . Retrieved October 17, 2020 . ^ Schmidt, Michael S. ; Protess, Ben; Vogel, Kenneth P. ; Rashbaum, William K. (October 11, 2019). "Giuliani Is Said to Be Under Investigation for Ukraine Work" . The New York Times . Archived from the original on October 13, 2019 . Retrieved October 17, 2020 . ^ Strohm, Chris; Fabian, Jordan (November 15, 2019). "Giuliani Faces U.S. Probe on Campaign Finance, Lobbying Breaches" . Bloomberg News . Archived from the original on October 16, 2020 . Retrieved October 17, 2020 . ^ Vogel, Kenneth P. ; Fandos, Nicholas (March 11, 2020). "Senate Panel Delays Subpoena Vote Over Concerns About Ukraine Witness" . The New York Times . Archived from the original on August 1, 2020 . Retrieved October 17, 2020 . ^ Harris, Shane ; Nakashima, Ellen ; Miller, Greg; Dawsey, Josh (October 15, 2020). "White House was warned Giuliani was target of Russian intelligence operation to feed misinformation to Trump" . The Washington Post . Archived from the original on November 17, 2020 . Retrieved October 17, 2020 . ^ Banco, Erin; Ackerman, Spencer ; Suebsaeng, Asawin (October 16, 2020). "Bolton Warned His Staff To Stay Away From Russia-Aligned Rudy Giuliani" . The Daily Beast . Archived from the original on November 1, 2020 . Retrieved October 17, 2020 . ^ Suebsaeng, Asawin; Banco, Erin (October 17, 2020). "Rudy: Only '50/50' Chance I Worked With a 'Russian Spy' to Dig Dirt on Bidens" . The Daily Beast . Archived from the original on October 17, 2020 . Retrieved October 17, 2020 . ^ a b Timberg, Craig; Viser, Matt; Hamburger, Tom (March 30, 2022). "Here's how The Post analyzed Hunter Biden's laptop" . The Washington Post . Retrieved March 31, 2022 . ^ Robertson, Katie (October 18, 2020). "New York Post Published Hunter Biden Report Amid Newsroom Doubts" . The New York Times . Archived from the original on October 18, 2020 . Retrieved October 18, 2020 . ^ Benveniste, Alexis (October 18, 2020). "The anatomy of the New York Post's dubious Hunter Biden story" . CNN . Archived from the original on October 19, 2020 . Retrieved June 6, 2024 . ^ Bertrand, Natasha (October 19, 2020). "Hunter Biden story is Russian disinfo, dozens of former intel officials say" . Politico . Archived from the original on October 20, 2020 . Retrieved October 20, 2020 . ^ Schreckinger, Ben (October 12, 2021). " 'Hiding the Ball': Hunter Biden Complicates White House Anti-Corruption Push" . Politico . Retrieved March 1, 2022 . ^ Benner, Katie ; Vogel, Kenneth P. ; Schmidt, Michael S. (March 16, 2022). "Hunter Biden Paid Tax Bill, but Broad Federal Investigation Continues" . The New York Times . ISSN 0362-4331 . Retrieved March 31, 2022 . ^ Rana, Manveen (November 9, 2020). "I was asked to lie about Hunter Biden, admits Ukrainian businessman: Hares Youssef claims he was promised a US visa in return for information that would damage Joe Biden's presidential campaign" . The Times . Archived from the original on November 9, 2020 . Retrieved November 10, 2020 . ^ Politi, James; Sevastopulo, Demetri; Peels, Michael; Olearchyk, Roman (October 4, 2019). "Envoys pushed to oust Ukraine prosecutor before Biden" . Financial Times . Archived from the original on October 23, 2020 . Retrieved October 15, 2020 . ^ McLaughlin, Daniel (March 29, 2016). "EU hails sacking of Ukraine's prosecutor Viktor Shokin" . The Irish Times . Archived from the original on October 3, 2019 . Retrieved October 15, 2020 . ^ Kramer, Andrew E. (March 29, 2016). "Ukraine Ousts Viktor Shokin, Top Prosecutor, and Political Stability Hangs in the Balance" . The New York Times . ISSN 0362-4331 . Archived from the original on September 27, 2019 . Retrieved October 18, 2020 . ^ Carroll, Oliver (October 9, 2019). "The inside story of Ukraine's 'very good' prosecutor at the centre of Trump's latest scandal" . The Independent . Archived from the original on October 21, 2020 . Retrieved October 18, 2020 . ^ Bump, Philip (September 25, 2023). "The Republican case against Biden takes a body blow ... from Fox News" . The Washington Post . Retrieved January 29, 2024 . ^ Meyer, Ken (September 25, 2023). "Ex-Ukrainian President Wrecks Fox Host's Attempt to Use Shokin in Biden Conspiracy: 'Please' Don't Use This 'Completely Crazy Person' " . Mediaite . Retrieved January 29, 2024 . ^ Ivanova, Polina (October 19, 2019). "What Hunter Biden did on the board of Ukrainian energy company Burisma" . Reuters . Kiev . Retrieved June 16, 2021 . ^ Ivanova, Polina; Tsvetkova, Maria; Zhegulev, Ilya; Baker, Luke (October 18, 2019). "What Hunter Biden did on the board of Ukrainian energy company Burisma" . Reuters. ^ Kranish, Michael ; Stern, David L. (July 22, 2019). "As vice president, Biden said Ukraine should increase gas production. Then his son got a job with a Ukrainian gas company" . The Washington Post . ISSN 0190-8286 . Archived from the original on October 22, 2020 . Retrieved October 23, 2020 . ^ Schorr, Isaac (January 23, 2025). " 'Don't Write About the Laptop, Don't Talk About the Laptop': Ace Reporters Claim Politico Killed Negative Biden Stories" . Mediaite . Retrieved January 24, 2025 . ^ Hughes, Siobhan; Ferek, Katy Stech (September 12, 2023). "House Speaker Kevin McCarthy Launches Formal Biden Impeachment Inquiry" . The Wall Street Journal . ^ Alemany, Jacqueline (November 10, 2023). "Momentum behind impeachment inquiry slows under new speaker" . The Washington Post . ^ Zhao, Christina (December 2, 2023). "Speaker Mike Johnson says he thinks he has the votes to authorize Biden impeachment inquiry" . NBC News . ^ Kaplan, Rebecca; Kapur, Sahil; Shabad, Rebecca (December 1, 2023). "House vote to authorize Biden impeachment inquiry could happen as early as next week" . NBC News . ^ Fitzpatrick, Sarah; Concepcion, Summer (March 20, 2024). "Lev Parnas, ex-Giuliani associate, testified allegations against Bidens are false and 'spread by the Kremlin' " . NBC News . Retrieved March 21, 2024 . ^ Rohrlich, Justin (March 20, 2024). "Comer Keeps Stepping In It as Impeachment Witness Dishes Dirt on Giuliani" . The Daily Beast . Retrieved March 21, 2024 . ^ Parnas, Lev (March 19, 2024). "Written Statement of Lev Parnas, March 19, 2024" (PDF) . House Oversight Committee . Retrieved March 21, 2024 . ^ "Lev Parnas dishes dirt on Rudy Giuliani and escaping the 'Trump cult' in madcap Biden impeachment hearing" . The Independent . March 20, 2024. ^ Walsh, Sheri (March 20, 2024). "At House impeachment inquiry hearing, key witness Lev Parnas blasts Republicans for pushing 'falsehoods' " . UPI . Retrieved March 22, 2024 . v t e Joe Biden 46th President of the United States (2021–2025) 47th Vice President of the United States (2009–2017) U.S. Senator from Delaware (1973–2009) Senator Early life and career Classified Information Procedures Act Counterterrorism Act Violence Against Women Act Violent Crime Control and Law Enforcement Act Vice presidency Obama transition Task forces Gun Violence Prevention Protect Students from Sexual Assault First Trump transition Presidency Appointments Cabinet Harris vice presidency Agriculture Commerce Defense Education Energy Executive Office appointments HHS Homeland Security HUD Interior Justice U.S. attorneys Labor State ambassadors Transportation Treasury Veterans Affairs Judicial appointments Jackson Supreme Court candidates Legislation 2021 American Rescue Plan Act Capitol Police Emergency Assistance Act Consolidated Appropriations Act Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act National Defense Authorization Act RENACER Act Uyghur Forced Labor Prevention Act 2022 Bipartisan Safer Communities Act CHIPS and Science Act Consolidated Appropriations Act Electoral Count Reform and Presidential Transition Improvement Act Merger Filing Fee Modernization Act No TikTok on Government Devices Act Pregnant Workers Fairness Act State Antitrust Enforcement Venue Act Emmett Till Antilynching Act Inflation Reduction Act Medical Marijuana and Cannabidiol Research Expansion Act PACT Act National Defense Authorization Act Postal Service Reform Act Respect for Marriage Act Speak Out Act Ukraine Democracy Defense Lend-Lease Act 2023 COVID-19 Origin Act Fiscal Responsibility Act National Defense Authorization Act DCA agreement between Finland and the US 2024 ADVANCE Act Consolidated Appropriations Act National Defense Authorization Act National Security Act Protecting Americans from Foreign Adversary Controlled Applications Act 2025 Social Security Fairness Act Policies Cannabis COVID-19 COVID-19 Advisory Board White House COVID-19 Response Team Economic Biden v. Nebraska Build Back Better Act Build Back Better Plan Elementary and Secondary School Emergency Relief Fund Electoral and ethical Presidential Commission on the Supreme Court Summit for Democracy Environmental 2021 Leaders Summit on Climate Executive Order 13990 Foreign 2021 Russia–United States summit 2023 Chinese balloon incident AUKUS Camp David Principles Afghanistan withdrawal killing of Ayman al-Zawahiri War in Ukraine 2022 visit by Volodymyr Zelenskyy 2023 visit to Ukraine War in Israel Ankara prisoner exchange Immigration A Proclamation on Securing the Border Social 2021 National Day of Unity Space Timeline Transition Inauguration security Celebrating America protests First 100 days 2021 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 2022 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 2023 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 2024 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 January 2025 Second Trump transition Classified documents incident White House cocaine incident Efforts to impeach House Oversight Committee investigation inquiry Executive actions proclamations Opinion polling 2021 2022 2023 2024–2025 Presidential trips international 2021 2022 2023 2024–2025 Death and state funeral of Jimmy Carter Elections U.S. Senate 1972 1978 1984 1990 1996 2002 2008 Vice presidential 2008 campaign selection convention debate election transition 2012 campaign convention debate election Presidential 1988 campaign primaries 2008 campaign primaries debates 2020 campaign endorsements celebrity organizations Congress state and territorial officials municipal officials primaries endorsements debates Unity Task Forces running mate selection convention debates election protests 2024 campaign withdrawal Democratic opposition primaries endorsements protest vote movements debate Family Edward Francis Blewitt (great-grandfather) Neilia Hunter Biden (first wife) Jill Biden (second wife) James Biden (brother) Valerie Biden Owens (sister) Beau Biden (son) Hunter Biden (son) Ashley Biden (daughter) Howard Krein (son-in-law) Hallie Olivere Biden (daughter-in-law) Kathleen Buhle (former daughter-in-law) Melissa Cohen Biden (daughter-in-law) Dogs Champ Major Commander Cat Willow Writings Promises to Keep Promise Me, Dad Tomorrow Will Be Different (foreword) Speeches Inaugural address (2021) Joint session of Congress (2021) State of the Union Address 2022 2023 2024 Warsaw speech (2022) Battle for the Soul of the Nation speech (2022) Farewell address (2025) Media depictions Confirmation The Choice 2020 " Intro to Political Science " My Son Hunter " One Last Ride " The Onion ' s "Diamond Joe" Our Cartoon President Saturday Night Live parodies Spitting Image Related Age and health concerns Awards Beau Biden Cancer Moonshot Biden Foundation Biden Presidential Library Biden–Ukraine conspiracy theory Buy a shotgun Eponyms Hunter Biden laptop controversy I Did That! Let's Go Brandon Public image Sexual assault allegation Situation Room Sleepy Joe 2019 Trump–Ukraine scandal ← Donald Trump → ← Dick Cheney Mike Pence → Category v t e Hunter Biden Family Kathleen Buhle (first wife) Melissa Cohen Biden (second wife) Hallie Olivere Biden (former partner) Joe Biden (father) Neilia Hunter Biden (mother) Beau Biden (brother) Ashley Biden (half-sister) Public image Biden–Ukraine conspiracy theory Department of Justice investigation Laptop controversy United States House Oversight Committee investigation into the Biden family In popular culture Beautiful Things If We Break My Son Hunter v t e First presidency of Donald Trump (2017–2021) Previous: Obama administration Next: Biden administration See also: Second Trump administration General Appointments ambassadors attorneys judges Supreme Court candidates Gorsuch Kavanaugh Barrett Cabinet Pence vice presidency Economic advisors Withdrawn appointees Short-tenure appointees Dismissals and resignations attorneys Comey inspectors general Executive orders Legal affairs Impeachments efforts resolutions impeachment inquiry first impeachment first trial second impeachment second trial proposed expungements Opinion polling 2017 2018 2019 Pardons Joe Arpaio commutation of Jaime Davidson Proclamations 2017 2018 2019 2020–21 Trips 2017 2018 2019 2020–21 international Rex TIllerson Mike Pompeo North Korea summit Singapore Hanoi DMZ Riyadh summit Helsinki summit Namaste Trump Events Timeline First 100 days 2017 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 2018 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 2019 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 2020 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 January 2021 Speeches Joint address to Congress Warsaw speech National Scout Jamboree State of the Union Address 2018 2019 2020 Oval Office Address 2019 2020 Farewell address Other Transition Inauguration Biden transition Policies Domestic Government shutdowns January 2018 2018–2019 COVID-19 pandemic Taskforce Communication Government response stimulus bills CARES Act Consolidated Appropriations Act, 2021 Operation Warp Speed White House outbreak Interference with science agencies Reactions to the George Floyd protests Photo op at St. John's Church Deployment of federal forces in the United States 2020 Mount Rushmore Fireworks Celebration National Garden of American Heroes Infrastructure Racial views Social First Step Act Cannabis Space Economic Tax cuts Tariffs China trade war USMCA Farmer bailouts Environmental Paris Agreement withdrawal America's Water Infrastructure Act of 2018 Foreign America First Saudi Arabia arms deal Iran nuclear deal withdrawal Relations with Israel Jerusalem recognition Golan Heights recognition Palestine peace plan Abraham Accords UAE Bahrain Sudan Morocco Kosovo–Serbia agreements Syria strikes 2017 2018 Killings al-Baghdadi Soleimani Afghanistan withdrawal Taliban deal Proposed invasion of Venezuela Immigration Travel bans reactions legal challenges protests replacement Executive Order 13767 Border wall Family separation policy protests Migrant detentions Troop deployments National emergency Protests 2017 Women's March list Lincoln Portland Seattle global LGBTQ Travel ban list Day Without Immigrants Not My Presidents Day Day Without a Woman Tax March March for Science list Portland Seattle 2018 People's Climate March May Day March for Truth Impeachment March Boston Free Speech Rally (counter-protest) U.S. national anthem kneeling protests 2018 Women's March list Gun violence March for Our Lives list Portland Seattle Family separation Abolish ICE Families Belong Together Occupy ICE Women Disobey Donald Trump baby balloon Kremlin Annex Nobody Is Above the Law 2019 Women's March list 2019 Presidents Day protest Dump Trump (statue) December 2019 impeachment protests 2020 Women's March January list October list Racial unrest George Floyd protests list-USA list-abroad Trump Statue Initiative God Emperor Trump Related 2016 election Trump campaign Trumpism Donald Trump and fascism Social media Twitter Crossfire Hurricane Classified information disclosures Special counsel investigations Mueller Durham Links between Trump administration and Russian government officials Russian bounty program Anonymous senior official op-ed Stormy Daniels scandal Ukraine scandal Federal government data breach Attempts to overturn the 2020 presidential election Fake electors plot Chesebro memos Eastman memos Lawsuits Texas v. Pennsylvania Jeffrey Clark letter January 6 United States Capitol attack timeline aftermath continued protests domestic reactions international reactions Presidential Library Category v t e Conspiracy theories List of conspiracy theories Overview Core topics Antiscience Cabals deep state éminence grise power behind the throne Civil / Criminal / Political conspiracies Conspiracy Crisis actors Deception Dystopia Espionage Global catastrophe scenarios Hidden message Pseudohistory Pseudoscience Secrecy Secret societies Urban legends and myths Psychology Attitude polarization Cognitive dissonance Communal reinforcement Confirmation bias Denialism Locus of control Manipulation Mass psychogenic illness moral panics Paranoia Psychological projection Astronomy and outer space 2012 phenomenon Nibiru cataclysm Ancient astronauts Apollo Moon landings Flat Earth Hollow Earth Hollow Moon Reptilians UFOs Alien abduction Area 51 Black Knight satellite Cryptoterrestrial / Extraterrestrial / Interdimensional hypothesis Dulce Base Estimate of the Situation (1948) Lake Michigan Triangle MJ-12 Men in black Nazi UFOs Die Glocke Project Serpo Hoaxes Dundy County (1884) Maury Island (1947) Roswell (1947) Twin Falls (1947) Aztec, New Mexico (1949) Southern England (1967) Ilkley Moor (1987) Gulf Breeze (1987–88) Alien autopsy (1995) Morristown (2009) Deaths and disappearances Assassination / suicide theories Zachary Taylor (1850) Louis Le Prince (1890) Lord Kitchener (1916) Tom Thomson (1917) Władysław Sikorski (1943) Benito Mussolini (1945) Adolf Hitler (1945) Subhas Chandra Bose (1945) Johnny Stompanato (1958) Marilyn Monroe (1962) John F. Kennedy (1963) Lee Harvey Oswald (1963) Lal Bahadur Shastri (1966) Harold Holt (1967) Martin Luther King Jr. (1968) Robert F. Kennedy (1968) Salvador Allende (1973) Aldo Moro (1978) Renny Ottolina (1978) Pope John Paul I (1978) Airey Neave (1979) Olof Palme (1986) Zia-ul-Haq (1988) GEC-Marconi scientists (1980s–90s) Turgut Özal (1993) Vince Foster (1993) Kurt Cobain (1994) Yitzhak Rabin (1995) Diana, Princess of Wales (1997) Vatican murders (1998) Nepalese royal family (2001) Yasser Arafat (2004) Benazir Bhutto (2007) Osama bin Laden (2011) Hugo Chávez (2013) Seth Rich (2016) Alejandro Castro (2018) Jeffrey Epstein (2019) Chan Yin-lam (2019) Sushant Singh Rajput (2020) John McAfee (2021) Accidents / disasters Mary Celeste (1872) RMS Titanic (1912) Great Kantō earthquake (1923) Lynmouth Flood (1952) Dyatlov Pass (1959) Lost Cosmonauts (1950s–60s) JAT Flight 367 (1972) United Air Lines Flight 553 (1972) Itavia Flight 870 (1980) South African Airways Flight 295 (1987) Khamar-Daban (1993) MS Estonia (1994) TWA Flight 800 (1996) EgyptAir Flight 990 (1999) Malaysia Airlines Flight 370 (2014) Other cases Joan of Arc (1431) Yemenite children (1948–54) Elvis Presley (1977) Jonestown (1978) Body double hoax Paul McCartney Avril Lavigne Vladimir Putin Melania Trump Energy, environment Agenda 21 California drought manipulation Climate change denial false theories Free energy suppression HAARP Red mercury False flag allegations USS Maine (1898) RMS Lusitania (1915) Reichstag fire (1933) Pearl Harbor (1941) USS Liberty (1967) Lufthansa Flight 615 (1972) Widerøe Flight 933 (1982) KAL Flight 007 (1983) Mozambican presidential jet (1986) Pan Am Flight 103 (1988) Oklahoma City bombing (1995) 9/11 attacks (2001) advance knowledge WTC collapse Madrid train bombing (2004) London bombings (2005) Smolensk air disaster (2010) Malaysia Airlines Flight 17 (2014) Denial of the 7 October attacks (2023) Gender and sexuality Alpha/beta males Anti-LGBTQ Anti-gender movement Chemicals Drag panic Gay agenda Gay Nazis myth HIV/AIDS stigma United States Homintern Lavender Scare Recruitment Grooming Litter box hoax Transvestigation Finger pinching Gamergate Ideology in incel communities Larries / Gaylors Satanic panic Soy and masculinity Health 5G misinformation Anti-vaccination Autism MMR Thiomersal In chiropractic Misinformation Aspartame Big Pharma Chemtrails COVID-19 Ivermectin Lab leak Vaccines Turbo cancer In Canada / Philippines / United States Ebola Electronic harassment Germ theory denialism GMOs HIV/AIDS denialism Origins theories Oral polio AIDS hypothesis Lepers' plot Medbeds SARS (2003) Water fluoridation Pont-Saint-Esprit mass poisoning Race, religion and/or ethnicity Bhagwa Love Trap CERN ritual hoax COVID-19 and xenophobia Freemasons French Revolution Gas chambers for Poles in Warsaw (1940s) German POWs post-WWII Priory of Sion Product labeling Halal Kosher Tartarian Empire War against Islam White genocide Antisemitic Andinia Plan Blood libel Cohen Plan Doctors' plot During the Black Death Epsilon Team George Soros Holocaust denial Trivialization International Jewish conspiracy Committee of 300 Cultural Bolshevism / Jewish Bolshevism Żydokomuna Judeo-Masonic plot The Protocols of the Elders of Zion World War II Z.O.G. Judeopolonia Killing of Jesus Kalergi Plan New World Order Rothschilds Stab-in-the-back myth Christian / Anti-Christian Anti-Catholic Jesuits Popish Plot Vatican Bible Giuseppe Siri Islamophobic Counter-jihad Bihar human sacrifice Eurabia Great Replacement Love jihad Proposed "Islamo-leftism" inquiry Trojan Horse scandal Genocide denial / Denial of mass killings Armenian Assyrian Bangladesh Bosnian Cambodian The Holocaust Holodomor Nanjing Rwandan Serbs during WWII Regional Asia India Cow vigilante violence Greater Bangladesh Pakistan Jinnahpur Philippines Tallano gold South Korea Finger-pinching Thailand Finland Plot Americas (outside the United States) Argentina Andinia Plan Canada Avro Arrow cancellation Leuchter report Peru Casa Matusita Venezuela Daktari Ranch affair Golpe Azul Middle East / North Africa In the Arab world 10 agorot Cairo fire Kissinger Plan in Lebanon Israel-related animal theories Iran Western-backed Iranian Revolution Israel Pallywood Russia Alaska payment Dulles' Plan Golden billion Petrograd Military Organization Rasputin Ukraine bioweapons Turkey 2016 coup attempt Ergenekon Operation Sledgehammer Gezi Park protests Sèvres syndrome Üst akıl Other European Euromyth Georgia Global War Party Ireland German Plot Lithuania Statesmen Roman Republic First Catilinarian conspiracy Spain Mano Negra affair Sweden Lilla Saltsjöbadsavtalet UK Clockwork Orange plot Elm Guest House Harold Wilson Voting pencil United States Barack Obama Citizenship Religion Parentage "Obamagate" / Spygate Biden–Ukraine Black helicopters CIA and JFK CIA assistance to bin Laden Clinton body count Cultural Marxism Election denial movement FBI secret society FEMA camps Georgia Guidestones Jade Helm 15 Montauk Project Philadelphia Experiment Pizzagate The Plan Project Azorian QAnon Pastel Incidents Saddam–al-Qaeda Sandy Hook (2012) Springfield pet-eating hoax Trump–Ukraine "Vast right-wing conspiracy" Vietnam War POW/MIA issue / Stab-in-the-back myth 2020 election Italygate "Pence Card" Maricopa County ballot audit Stop the Steal Other Dead Internet theory NESARA/GESARA New Coke Phantom time / New chronology Shadow government claims Bilderberg Illuminati synarchism Shakespearean authorship Pseudolaw Admiralty law Freeman on the land movement Redemption movement Sovereign citizens Strawman theory Tax protesters Satirical Acre Bielefeld Birds Aren't Real Li's field Ted Cruz–Zodiac Killer meme See also Argument from ignorance Conspiracy Encyclopedia Conspiracy fiction Conspirituality Dogma pseudoskepticism Falsifiability Fringe science Historical negationism Online youth radicalization Paranormal Prejudice Hate speech Radicalization Science by press conference Superstition Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Biden–Ukraine_conspiracy_theory&oldid=1283537880 " Categories : Controversies of the 2020 United States presidential election Mass media-related controversies in the United States October 2020 in the United States Joe Biden 2020 presidential campaign Politics of Ukraine 2020 in Ukraine Trump–Ukraine scandal Conspiracy theories involving presidents of the United States Conspiracy theories promoted by Donald Trump Conspiracy theories regarding Joe Biden Rudy Giuliani Conspiracy theories in the United States Hunter Biden Ukraine–United States relations Joe Biden Biden administration controversies Impeachment in the United States First presidency of Donald Trump Presidency of Joe Biden Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Wikipedia extended-confirmed-protected pages Use American English from October 2020 All Wikipedia articles written in American English Use mdy dates from December 2022 Pages using multiple image with auto scaled images This page was last edited on 2 April 2025, at 03:49 (UTC) . Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc. , a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Biden–Ukraine conspiracy theory 5 languages Add topic

Ukrainian energy firm hires Biden son as lawyer | AP News Menu World SECTIONS Israel-Hamas war Russia-Ukraine War Español China Asia Pacific Latin America Europe Africa TOP STORIES Israel approves plans to intensify Gaza operations, official says Berlin still bears scars 80 years after pivotal battle that sealed the defeat of Nazi Germany Tourist boats capsize in sudden storm in southwest China, leaving 10 dead Newsletters The Morning Wire Our flagship newsletter breaks down the biggest headlines of the day. The Afternoon Wire Get caught up on what you may have missed throughout the day. See All Newsletters U.S. SECTIONS Immigration Weather Education Transportation Abortion LGBTQ+ Notable Deaths TOP STORIES From debate to dialogue: In a contentious era, 'Ethics Bowl' offers students a gentler alternative In battle against transgender rights, Trump targets HUD’s housing policies Indigenous people raise awareness about their missing and murdered Newsletters The Morning Wire Our flagship newsletter breaks down the biggest headlines of the day. See All Newsletters AP QUIZZES Test Your News I.Q. — take today’s quiz Politics SECTIONS Florida election results Wisconsin election results White House Congress U.S. Supreme Court TOP STORIES Trump says he will reopen Alcatraz prison In battle against transgender rights, Trump targets HUD’s housing policies Trump blasts Mexico's Sheinbaum for rejecting offer to send US troops into Mexico to fight cartels Newsletters Ground Game Exclusive insights and key stories from the world of politics. See All Newsletters Sports SECTIONS NBA MLB NHL WNBA NFL Auto Racing Soccer TOP STORIES The Commanders are hosting the 2027 NFL draft in Washington, AP source says Stephen Curry and Buddy Hield lead Warriors past Rockets 103-89 in Game 7 Tyrese Haliburton ignites closing run for Pacers, who stun Cavs 121-112 in Game 1 of East semis Newsletters AP Top 25 Poll Alerts Get email alerts for every college football Top 25 Poll release. The Sports Wire Your home base for in-depth reporting from the world of sports. See All Newsletters Entertainment SECTIONS Movie Reviews What to Stream Television Book Reviews Music Celebrity Interviews TOP STORIES Met Gala: Fashion's biggest night of the year is here. Here's how to watch and follow along Inside the 2025 Met Gala exhibit 'Thunderbolts' kicks off the summer movie season with $76 million at the box office Newsletters AP Entertainment Wire Get AP's first personalized newsletter delivering you entertainment news twice a week. See All Newsletters Business SECTIONS Tariffs Inflation Financial Markets Financial Wellness Technology TOP STORIES Trump threatens 100% tariff on foreign-made films In battle against transgender rights, Trump targets HUD’s housing policies How the stock market made back all its losses after Trump escalated the trade war Science SECTIONS Space Animals The Ancient World Climate Medicine TOP STORIES How the blood of a man who was bitten by hundreds of snakes could help save lives How to catch the Eta Aquarid meteor shower, debris of Halley's comet Soviet-era spacecraft is set to plunge to Earth a half-century after its failed launch to Venus Fact Check TOP STORIES FACT FOCUS: Trump touts his accomplishments at 100 days but at times falls short on the facts FACT FOCUS: Trump credited with rising military recruitment. Growth started before his reelection FACT FOCUS: Examining RFK Jr.'s claims about measles, autism and diet as head of HHS Oddities TOP STORIES Why ‘Star Wars’ fans say ‘May the 4th be with you’ Burro racing wins over runners in backcountry ode to mining history How the democracy sausage, a polling day snack, became Australia's election symbol A 3-foot difference didn't stop a horse-size Great Dane and tiny chihuahua from becoming friends Banksy's ‘Broken Heart' painting defaced on a Brooklyn wall is up for sale Cha-ching! Millions of dimes spill onto Texas highway after truck rolls Be Well TOP STORIES Altar acupuncture: A Minneapolis church brings well-being sessions to its migrant ministry Do you really need that extra ChapStick? Here are tips to reduce and tame workplace clutter What’s that rash? Put some thought into asking Google for medical help Taking a mental health leave from work is an option most people don't know about Community, mentors and skill-building: Experts weigh the role of employee resource groups In the rapidly shifting world of work, many employees are unclear what’s expected of them Newsletters Newsletters AP News Alerts Keep your pulse on the news with breaking news alerts from The AP. The Morning Wire Our flagship newsletter breaks down the biggest headlines of the day. Ground Game Exclusive insights and key stories from the world of politics. Beyond the Story Executive Editor Julie Pace brings you behind the scenes of the AP newsroom. The Afternoon Wire Get caught up on what you may have missed throughout the day. AP Entertainment Wire Get AP's first personalized newsletter delivering you entertainment news twice a week. See All Newsletters Photography SECTIONS 2024 YEAR END PHOTOS Photo Essays Photography TOP STORIES PHOTOS: Sovereignty wins the 151st Kentucky Derby AP PHOTOS : Hard-right candidate Simion decisively wins first round of Romania’s presidential redo A school under a highway is a sanctuary for disadvantaged children in India Newsletters The World in Pictures Get The AP’s most compelling photographs sent directly to your inbox. See All Newsletters AP Investigations Climate SECTIONS Indigenous peoples and climate Climate Questions Climate Migration India Focus TOP STORIES As Trump pares back ocean protections, California weighs expanding them Hope floats in the Amazon as Bacuri, a young manatee, fights for survival EPA announces broad reorganization that includes shuffle of scientific research Health TOP STORIES Cuts have eliminated more than a dozen US government health-tracking programs A community rallied to share flu shot experiences. Then the government stopped the study CDC reports 216 child deaths this flu season, the most in 15 years What’s that rash? Put some thought into asking Google for medical help Worries about flying seem to be taking off. Here's how to cope with in-flight anxiety Spring allergies are back. Here's how to check pollen levels and keep from sneezing Tech SECTIONS Artificial Intelligence Social Media TOP STORIES US states push for speed-limiting devices on the cars of dangerous drivers Grand Theft Auto VI delayed again, this time until May 2026 Harassed by Assassin’s Creed gamers, a professor fought back with kindness Lifestyle SECTIONS Food & Recipes Gardening Homes Travel Fashion Pets TOP STORIES From debate to dialogue: In a contentious era, 'Ethics Bowl' offers students a gentler alternative Met Gala: Fashion's biggest night of the year is here. Here's how to watch and follow along Inside the 2025 Met Gala exhibit Religion TOP STORIES AP PHOTOS: Indigenous deacon in Mexico echoes late pope's call to defend rights and Mother Earth Indigenous Catholics hope the next pope shares Francis' approach to Native people What's the geographic breakdown of the cardinals who will elect the new pope? Newsletters World of Faith Comprehensive global coverage of how religion shapes our world. See All Newsletters Español TOP STORIES Israel aprueba planes para escalar sus campaña militar en Gaza, según funcionario Francisco abrió la Iglesia a los pueblos originarios. ¿Seguirán sus puertas abiertas? Pueblos indígenas marchan para crear conciencia sobre sus desaparecidos y asesinados Trump critica a la presidenta de México por rechazar envío de tropas de EEUU para combatir cárteles En nueva entrevista, Trump dice que no sabe si apoya los derechos al debido proceso Standards Quizzes Press Releases My Account MORE World Israel-Hamas war Russia-Ukraine War Español China Asia Pacific Latin America Europe Africa Australia Middle East Global Elections U.S. Immigration Weather Education Transportation Abortion LGBTQ+ Notable Deaths Politics Florida election results Wisconsin election results White House Congress U.S. Supreme Court Sports NBA MLB NHL WNBA NFL Auto Racing Soccer Entertainment Movie Reviews What to Stream Television Book Reviews Music Celebrity Interviews Business Tariffs Inflation Financial Markets Financial Wellness Technology Science Space Animals The Ancient World Climate Medicine Fact Check Oddities Be Well Newsletters Photography 2024 YEAR END PHOTOS Photo Essays Photography AP Investigations Climate Indigenous peoples and climate Climate Questions Climate Migration India Focus Health Tech Artificial Intelligence Social Media Lifestyle Food & Recipes Gardening Homes Travel Fashion Pets Religion Español Standards Quizzes Press Releases My Account Sign in Search Query Submit Search Show Search Menu Submit Search World Israel-Hamas war Russia-Ukraine War Español China Asia Pacific Latin America Europe Africa Australia Middle East Global Elections SECTIONS Israel-Hamas war Russia-Ukraine War Español China Asia Pacific Latin America Europe Africa TOP STORIES Israel approves plans to intensify Gaza operations, official says Berlin still bears scars 80 years after pivotal battle that sealed the defeat of Nazi Germany Tourist boats capsize in sudden storm in southwest China, leaving 10 dead Newsletters The Morning Wire Our flagship newsletter breaks down the biggest headlines of the day. The Afternoon Wire Get caught up on what you may have missed throughout the day. See All Newsletters U.S. Immigration Weather Education Transportation Abortion LGBTQ+ Notable Deaths SECTIONS Immigration Weather Education Transportation Abortion LGBTQ+ Notable Deaths TOP STORIES From debate to dialogue: In a contentious era, 'Ethics Bowl' offers students a gentler alternative In battle against transgender rights, Trump targets HUD’s housing policies Indigenous people raise awareness about their missing and murdered Newsletters The Morning Wire Our flagship newsletter breaks down the biggest headlines of the day. See All Newsletters AP QUIZZES Test Your News I.Q. — take today’s quiz Politics Florida election results Wisconsin election results White House Congress U.S. Supreme Court SECTIONS Florida election results Wisconsin election results White House Congress U.S. Supreme Court TOP STORIES Trump says he will reopen Alcatraz prison In battle against transgender rights, Trump targets HUD’s housing policies Trump blasts Mexico's Sheinbaum for rejecting offer to send US troops into Mexico to fight cartels Newsletters Ground Game Exclusive insights and key stories from the world of politics. See All Newsletters Sports NBA MLB NHL WNBA NFL Auto Racing Soccer SECTIONS NBA MLB NHL WNBA NFL Auto Racing Soccer TOP STORIES The Commanders are hosting the 2027 NFL draft in Washington, AP source says Stephen Curry and Buddy Hield lead Warriors past Rockets 103-89 in Game 7 Tyrese Haliburton ignites closing run for Pacers, who stun Cavs 121-112 in Game 1 of East semis Newsletters AP Top 25 Poll Alerts Get email alerts for every college football Top 25 Poll release. The Sports Wire Your home base for in-depth reporting from the world of sports. See All Newsletters Entertainment Movie Reviews What to Stream Television Book Reviews Music Celebrity Interviews SECTIONS Movie Reviews What to Stream Television Book Reviews Music Celebrity Interviews TOP STORIES Met Gala: Fashion's biggest night of the year is here. Here's how to watch and follow along Inside the 2025 Met Gala exhibit 'Thunderbolts' kicks off the summer movie season with $76 million at the box office Newsletters AP Entertainment Wire Get AP's first personalized newsletter delivering you entertainment news twice a week. See All Newsletters Business Tariffs Inflation Financial Markets Financial Wellness Technology SECTIONS Tariffs Inflation Financial Markets Financial Wellness Technology TOP STORIES Trump threatens 100% tariff on foreign-made films In battle against transgender rights, Trump targets HUD’s housing policies How the stock market made back all its losses after Trump escalated the trade war Science Space Animals The Ancient World Climate Medicine SECTIONS Space Animals The Ancient World Climate Medicine TOP STORIES How the blood of a man who was bitten by hundreds of snakes could help save lives How to catch the Eta Aquarid meteor shower, debris of Halley's comet Soviet-era spacecraft is set to plunge to Earth a half-century after its failed launch to Venus Fact Check TOP STORIES FACT FOCUS: Trump touts his accomplishments at 100 days but at times falls short on the facts FACT FOCUS: Trump credited with rising military recruitment. Growth started before his reelection FACT FOCUS: Examining RFK Jr.'s claims about measles, autism and diet as head of HHS Oddities TOP STORIES Why ‘Star Wars’ fans say ‘May the 4th be with you’ Burro racing wins over runners in backcountry ode to mining history How the democracy sausage, a polling day snack, became Australia's election symbol A 3-foot difference didn't stop a horse-size Great Dane and tiny chihuahua from becoming friends Banksy's ‘Broken Heart' painting defaced on a Brooklyn wall is up for sale Cha-ching! Millions of dimes spill onto Texas highway after truck rolls Be Well TOP STORIES Altar acupuncture: A Minneapolis church brings well-being sessions to its migrant ministry Do you really need that extra ChapStick? Here are tips to reduce and tame workplace clutter What’s that rash? Put some thought into asking Google for medical help Taking a mental health leave from work is an option most people don't know about Community, mentors and skill-building: Experts weigh the role of employee resource groups In the rapidly shifting world of work, many employees are unclear what’s expected of them Newsletters Newsletters AP News Alerts Keep your pulse on the news with breaking news alerts from The AP. The Morning Wire Our flagship newsletter breaks down the biggest headlines of the day. Ground Game Exclusive insights and key stories from the world of politics. Beyond the Story Executive Editor Julie Pace brings you behind the scenes of the AP newsroom. The Afternoon Wire Get caught up on what you may have missed throughout the day. AP Entertainment Wire Get AP's first personalized newsletter delivering you entertainment news twice a week. See All Newsletters Photography 2024 YEAR END PHOTOS Photo Essays Photography SECTIONS 2024 YEAR END PHOTOS Photo Essays Photography TOP STORIES PHOTOS: Sovereignty wins the 151st Kentucky Derby AP PHOTOS : Hard-right candidate Simion decisively wins first round of Romania’s presidential redo A school under a highway is a sanctuary for disadvantaged children in India Newsletters The World in Pictures Get The AP’s most compelling photographs sent directly to your inbox. See All Newsletters AP Investigations Climate Indigenous peoples and climate Climate Questions Climate Migration India Focus SECTIONS Indigenous peoples and climate Climate Questions Climate Migration India Focus TOP STORIES As Trump pares back ocean protections, California weighs expanding them Hope floats in the Amazon as Bacuri, a young manatee, fights for survival EPA announces broad reorganization that includes shuffle of scientific research Health TOP STORIES Cuts have eliminated more than a dozen US government health-tracking programs A community rallied to share flu shot experiences. Then the government stopped the study CDC reports 216 child deaths this flu season, the most in 15 years What’s that rash? Put some thought into asking Google for medical help Worries about flying seem to be taking off. Here's how to cope with in-flight anxiety Spring allergies are back. Here's how to check pollen levels and keep from sneezing Tech Artificial Intelligence Social Media SECTIONS Artificial Intelligence Social Media TOP STORIES US states push for speed-limiting devices on the cars of dangerous drivers Grand Theft Auto VI delayed again, this time until May 2026 Harassed by Assassin’s Creed gamers, a professor fought back with kindness Lifestyle Food & Recipes Gardening Homes Travel Fashion Pets SECTIONS Food & Recipes Gardening Homes Travel Fashion Pets TOP STORIES From debate to dialogue: In a contentious era, 'Ethics Bowl' offers students a gentler alternative Met Gala: Fashion's biggest night of the year is here. Here's how to watch and follow along Inside the 2025 Met Gala exhibit Religion TOP STORIES AP PHOTOS: Indigenous deacon in Mexico echoes late pope's call to defend rights and Mother Earth Indigenous Catholics hope the next pope shares Francis' approach to Native people What's the geographic breakdown of the cardinals who will elect the new pope? Newsletters World of Faith Comprehensive global coverage of how religion shapes our world. See All Newsletters Español TOP STORIES Israel aprueba planes para escalar sus campaña militar en Gaza, según funcionario Francisco abrió la Iglesia a los pueblos originarios. ¿Seguirán sus puertas abiertas? Pueblos indígenas marchan para crear conciencia sobre sus desaparecidos y asesinados Trump critica a la presidenta de México por rechazar envío de tropas de EEUU para combatir cárteles En nueva entrevista, Trump dice que no sabe si apoya los derechos al debido proceso Standards Quizzes Press Releases My Account The Associated Press is an independent global news organization dedicated to factual reporting. Founded in 1846, AP today remains the most trusted source of fast, accurate, unbiased news in all formats and the essential provider of the technology and services vital to the news business. More than half the world’s population sees AP journalism every day. twitter instagram facebook The Associated Press ap.org Careers Advertise with us Contact Us Accessibility Statement Terms of Use Privacy Policy Cookie Settings Do Not Sell or Share My Personal Information Limit Use and Disclosure of Sensitive Personal Information CA Notice of Collection More From AP News About AP News Values and Principles AP’s Role in Elections AP Leads AP Definitive Source Blog AP Images Spotlight Blog AP Stylebook The Associated Press ap.org Careers Advertise with us Contact Us Accessibility Statement Terms of Use Privacy Policy Cookie Settings Do Not Sell or Share My Personal Information Limit Use and Disclosure of Sensitive Personal Information CA Notice of Collection More From AP News About AP News Values and Principles AP’s Role in Elections AP Leads AP Definitive Source Blog AP Images Spotlight Blog AP Stylebook SECTIONS About AP News Values and Principles AP’s Role in Elections AP Leads AP Definitive Source Blog AP Images Spotlight Blog AP Stylebook Copyright 2025 The Associated Press. All Rights Reserved. Menu World SECTIONS Israel-Hamas war Russia-Ukraine War Español China Asia Pacific Latin America Europe Africa TOP STORIES Israel approves plans to intensify Gaza operations, official says Berlin still bears scars 80 years after pivotal battle that sealed the defeat of Nazi Germany Tourist boats capsize in sudden storm in southwest China, leaving 10 dead Newsletters The Morning Wire Our flagship newsletter breaks down the biggest headlines of the day. The Afternoon Wire Get caught up on what you may have missed throughout the day. See All Newsletters U.S. SECTIONS Immigration Weather Education Transportation Abortion LGBTQ+ Notable Deaths TOP STORIES From debate to dialogue: In a contentious era, 'Ethics Bowl' offers students a gentler alternative In battle against transgender rights, Trump targets HUD’s housing policies Indigenous people raise awareness about their missing and murdered Newsletters The Morning Wire Our flagship newsletter breaks down the biggest headlines of the day. See All Newsletters AP QUIZZES Test Your News I.Q. — take today’s quiz Politics SECTIONS Florida election results Wisconsin election results White House Congress U.S. Supreme Court TOP STORIES Trump says he will reopen Alcatraz prison In battle against transgender rights, Trump targets HUD’s housing policies Trump blasts Mexico's Sheinbaum for rejecting offer to send US troops into Mexico to fight cartels Newsletters Ground Game Exclusive insights and key stories from the world of politics. See All Newsletters Sports SECTIONS NBA MLB NHL WNBA NFL Auto Racing Soccer TOP STORIES The Commanders are hosting the 2027 NFL draft in Washington, AP source says Stephen Curry and Buddy Hield lead Warriors past Rockets 103-89 in Game 7 Tyrese Haliburton ignites closing run for Pacers, who stun Cavs 121-112 in Game 1 of East semis Newsletters AP Top 25 Poll Alerts Get email alerts for every college football Top 25 Poll release. The Sports Wire Your home base for in-depth reporting from the world of sports. See All Newsletters Entertainment SECTIONS Movie Reviews What to Stream Television Book Reviews Music Celebrity Interviews TOP STORIES Met Gala: Fashion's biggest night of the year is here. Here's how to watch and follow along Inside the 2025 Met Gala exhibit 'Thunderbolts' kicks off the summer movie season with $76 million at the box office Newsletters AP Entertainment Wire Get AP's first personalized newsletter delivering you entertainment news twice a week. See All Newsletters Business SECTIONS Tariffs Inflation Financial Markets Financial Wellness Technology TOP STORIES Trump threatens 100% tariff on foreign-made films In battle against transgender rights, Trump targets HUD’s housing policies How the stock market made back all its losses after Trump escalated the trade war Science SECTIONS Space Animals The Ancient World Climate Medicine TOP STORIES How the blood of a man who was bitten by hundreds of snakes could help save lives How to catch the Eta Aquarid meteor shower, debris of Halley's comet Soviet-era spacecraft is set to plunge to Earth a half-century after its failed launch to Venus Fact Check TOP STORIES FACT FOCUS: Trump touts his accomplishments at 100 days but at times falls short on the facts FACT FOCUS: Trump credited with rising military recruitment. Growth started before his reelection FACT FOCUS: Examining RFK Jr.'s claims about measles, autism and diet as head of HHS Oddities TOP STORIES Why ‘Star Wars’ fans say ‘May the 4th be with you’ Burro racing wins over runners in backcountry ode to mining history How the democracy sausage, a polling day snack, became Australia's election symbol A 3-foot difference didn't stop a horse-size Great Dane and tiny chihuahua from becoming friends Banksy's ‘Broken Heart' painting defaced on a Brooklyn wall is up for sale Cha-ching! Millions of dimes spill onto Texas highway after truck rolls Be Well TOP STORIES Altar acupuncture: A Minneapolis church brings well-being sessions to its migrant ministry Do you really need that extra ChapStick? Here are tips to reduce and tame workplace clutter What’s that rash? Put some thought into asking Google for medical help Taking a mental health leave from work is an option most people don't know about Community, mentors and skill-building: Experts weigh the role of employee resource groups In the rapidly shifting world of work, many employees are unclear what’s expected of them Newsletters Newsletters AP News Alerts Keep your pulse on the news with breaking news alerts from The AP. The Morning Wire Our flagship newsletter breaks down the biggest headlines of the day. Ground Game Exclusive insights and key stories from the world of politics. Beyond the Story Executive Editor Julie Pace brings you behind the scenes of the AP newsroom. The Afternoon Wire Get caught up on what you may have missed throughout the day. AP Entertainment Wire Get AP's first personalized newsletter delivering you entertainment news twice a week. See All Newsletters Photography SECTIONS 2024 YEAR END PHOTOS Photo Essays Photography TOP STORIES PHOTOS: Sovereignty wins the 151st Kentucky Derby AP PHOTOS : Hard-right candidate Simion decisively wins first round of Romania’s presidential redo A school under a highway is a sanctuary for disadvantaged children in India Newsletters The World in Pictures Get The AP’s most compelling photographs sent directly to your inbox. See All Newsletters AP Investigations Climate SECTIONS Indigenous peoples and climate Climate Questions Climate Migration India Focus TOP STORIES As Trump pares back ocean protections, California weighs expanding them Hope floats in the Amazon as Bacuri, a young manatee, fights for survival EPA announces broad reorganization that includes shuffle of scientific research Health TOP STORIES Cuts have eliminated more than a dozen US government health-tracking programs A community rallied to share flu shot experiences. Then the government stopped the study CDC reports 216 child deaths this flu season, the most in 15 years What’s that rash? Put some thought into asking Google for medical help Worries about flying seem to be taking off. Here's how to cope with in-flight anxiety Spring allergies are back. Here's how to check pollen levels and keep from sneezing Tech SECTIONS Artificial Intelligence Social Media TOP STORIES US states push for speed-limiting devices on the cars of dangerous drivers Grand Theft Auto VI delayed again, this time until May 2026 Harassed by Assassin’s Creed gamers, a professor fought back with kindness Lifestyle SECTIONS Food & Recipes Gardening Homes Travel Fashion Pets TOP STORIES From debate to dialogue: In a contentious era, 'Ethics Bowl' offers students a gentler alternative Met Gala: Fashion's biggest night of the year is here. Here's how to watch and follow along Inside the 2025 Met Gala exhibit Religion TOP STORIES AP PHOTOS: Indigenous deacon in Mexico echoes late pope's call to defend rights and Mother Earth Indigenous Catholics hope the next pope shares Francis' approach to Native people What's the geographic breakdown of the cardinals who will elect the new pope? Newsletters World of Faith Comprehensive global coverage of how religion shapes our world. See All Newsletters Español TOP STORIES Israel aprueba planes para escalar sus campaña militar en Gaza, según funcionario Francisco abrió la Iglesia a los pueblos originarios. ¿Seguirán sus puertas abiertas? Pueblos indígenas marchan para crear conciencia sobre sus desaparecidos y asesinados Trump critica a la presidenta de México por rechazar envío de tropas de EEUU para combatir cárteles En nueva entrevista, Trump dice que no sabe si apoya los derechos al debido proceso Standards Quizzes Press Releases My Account MORE World Israel-Hamas war Russia-Ukraine War Español China Asia Pacific Latin America Europe Africa Australia Middle East Global Elections U.S. Immigration Weather Education Transportation Abortion LGBTQ+ Notable Deaths Politics Florida election results Wisconsin election results White House Congress U.S. Supreme Court Sports NBA MLB NHL WNBA NFL Auto Racing Soccer Entertainment Movie Reviews What to Stream Television Book Reviews Music Celebrity Interviews Business Tariffs Inflation Financial Markets Financial Wellness Technology Science Space Animals The Ancient World Climate Medicine Fact Check Oddities Be Well Newsletters Photography 2024 YEAR END PHOTOS Photo Essays Photography AP Investigations Climate Indigenous peoples and climate Climate Questions Climate Migration India Focus Health Tech Artificial Intelligence Social Media Lifestyle Food & Recipes Gardening Homes Travel Fashion Pets Religion Español Standards Quizzes Press Releases My Account Sign in Search Query Submit Search Show Search Menu Submit Search World Israel-Hamas war Russia-Ukraine War Español China Asia Pacific Latin America Europe Africa Australia Middle East Global Elections SECTIONS Israel-Hamas war Russia-Ukraine War Español China Asia Pacific Latin America Europe Africa TOP STORIES Israel approves plans to intensify Gaza operations, official says Berlin still bears scars 80 years after pivotal battle that sealed the defeat of Nazi Germany Tourist boats capsize in sudden storm in southwest China, leaving 10 dead Newsletters The Morning Wire Our flagship newsletter breaks down the biggest headlines of the day. The Afternoon Wire Get caught up on what you may have missed throughout the day. See All Newsletters U.S. Immigration Weather Education Transportation Abortion LGBTQ+ Notable Deaths SECTIONS Immigration Weather Education Transportation Abortion LGBTQ+ Notable Deaths TOP STORIES From debate to dialogue: In a contentious era, 'Ethics Bowl' offers students a gentler alternative In battle against transgender rights, Trump targets HUD’s housing policies Indigenous people raise awareness about their missing and murdered Newsletters The Morning Wire Our flagship newsletter breaks down the biggest headlines of the day. See All Newsletters AP QUIZZES Test Your News I.Q. — take today’s quiz Politics Florida election results Wisconsin election results White House Congress U.S. Supreme Court SECTIONS Florida election results Wisconsin election results White House Congress U.S. Supreme Court TOP STORIES Trump says he will reopen Alcatraz prison In battle against transgender rights, Trump targets HUD’s housing policies Trump blasts Mexico's Sheinbaum for rejecting offer to send US troops into Mexico to fight cartels Newsletters Ground Game Exclusive insights and key stories from the world of politics. See All Newsletters Sports NBA MLB NHL WNBA NFL Auto Racing Soccer SECTIONS NBA MLB NHL WNBA NFL Auto Racing Soccer TOP STORIES The Commanders are hosting the 2027 NFL draft in Washington, AP source says Stephen Curry and Buddy Hield lead Warriors past Rockets 103-89 in Game 7 Tyrese Haliburton ignites closing run for Pacers, who stun Cavs 121-112 in Game 1 of East semis Newsletters AP Top 25 Poll Alerts Get email alerts for every college football Top 25 Poll release. The Sports Wire Your home base for in-depth reporting from the world of sports. See All Newsletters Entertainment Movie Reviews What to Stream Television Book Reviews Music Celebrity Interviews SECTIONS Movie Reviews What to Stream Television Book Reviews Music Celebrity Interviews TOP STORIES Met Gala: Fashion's biggest night of the year is here. Here's how to watch and follow along Inside the 2025 Met Gala exhibit 'Thunderbolts' kicks off the summer movie season with $76 million at the box office Newsletters AP Entertainment Wire Get AP's first personalized newsletter delivering you entertainment news twice a week. See All Newsletters Business Tariffs Inflation Financial Markets Financial Wellness Technology SECTIONS Tariffs Inflation Financial Markets Financial Wellness Technology TOP STORIES Trump threatens 100% tariff on foreign-made films In battle against transgender rights, Trump targets HUD’s housing policies How the stock market made back all its losses after Trump escalated the trade war Science Space Animals The Ancient World Climate Medicine SECTIONS Space Animals The Ancient World Climate Medicine TOP STORIES How the blood of a man who was bitten by hundreds of snakes could help save lives How to catch the Eta Aquarid meteor shower, debris of Halley's comet Soviet-era spacecraft is set to plunge to Earth a half-century after its failed launch to Venus Fact Check TOP STORIES FACT FOCUS: Trump touts his accomplishments at 100 days but at times falls short on the facts FACT FOCUS: Trump credited with rising military recruitment. Growth started before his reelection FACT FOCUS: Examining RFK Jr.'s claims about measles, autism and diet as head of HHS Oddities TOP STORIES Why ‘Star Wars’ fans say ‘May the 4th be with you’ Burro racing wins over runners in backcountry ode to mining history How the democracy sausage, a polling day snack, became Australia's election symbol A 3-foot difference didn't stop a horse-size Great Dane and tiny chihuahua from becoming friends Banksy's ‘Broken Heart' painting defaced on a Brooklyn wall is up for sale Cha-ching! Millions of dimes spill onto Texas highway after truck rolls Be Well TOP STORIES Altar acupuncture: A Minneapolis church brings well-being sessions to its migrant ministry Do you really need that extra ChapStick? Here are tips to reduce and tame workplace clutter What’s that rash? Put some thought into asking Google for medical help Taking a mental health leave from work is an option most people don't know about Community, mentors and skill-building: Experts weigh the role of employee resource groups In the rapidly shifting world of work, many employees are unclear what’s expected of them Newsletters Newsletters AP News Alerts Keep your pulse on the news with breaking news alerts from The AP. The Morning Wire Our flagship newsletter breaks down the biggest headlines of the day. Ground Game Exclusive insights and key stories from the world of politics. Beyond the Story Executive Editor Julie Pace brings you behind the scenes of the AP newsroom. The Afternoon Wire Get caught up on what you may have missed throughout the day. AP Entertainment Wire Get AP's first personalized newsletter delivering you entertainment news twice a week. See All Newsletters Photography 2024 YEAR END PHOTOS Photo Essays Photography SECTIONS 2024 YEAR END PHOTOS Photo Essays Photography TOP STORIES PHOTOS: Sovereignty wins the 151st Kentucky Derby AP PHOTOS : Hard-right candidate Simion decisively wins first round of Romania’s presidential redo A school under a highway is a sanctuary for disadvantaged children in India Newsletters The World in Pictures Get The AP’s most compelling photographs sent directly to your inbox. See All Newsletters AP Investigations Climate Indigenous peoples and climate Climate Questions Climate Migration India Focus SECTIONS Indigenous peoples and climate Climate Questions Climate Migration India Focus TOP STORIES As Trump pares back ocean protections, California weighs expanding them Hope floats in the Amazon as Bacuri, a young manatee, fights for survival EPA announces broad reorganization that includes shuffle of scientific research Health TOP STORIES Cuts have eliminated more than a dozen US government health-tracking programs A community rallied to share flu shot experiences. Then the government stopped the study CDC reports 216 child deaths this flu season, the most in 15 years What’s that rash? Put some thought into asking Google for medical help Worries about flying seem to be taking off. Here's how to cope with in-flight anxiety Spring allergies are back. Here's how to check pollen levels and keep from sneezing Tech Artificial Intelligence Social Media SECTIONS Artificial Intelligence Social Media TOP STORIES US states push for speed-limiting devices on the cars of dangerous drivers Grand Theft Auto VI delayed again, this time until May 2026 Harassed by Assassin’s Creed gamers, a professor fought back with kindness Lifestyle Food & Recipes Gardening Homes Travel Fashion Pets SECTIONS Food & Recipes Gardening Homes Travel Fashion Pets TOP STORIES From debate to dialogue: In a contentious era, 'Ethics Bowl' offers students a gentler alternative Met Gala: Fashion's biggest night of the year is here. Here's how to watch and follow along Inside the 2025 Met Gala exhibit Religion TOP STORIES AP PHOTOS: Indigenous deacon in Mexico echoes late pope's call to defend rights and Mother Earth Indigenous Catholics hope the next pope shares Francis' approach to Native people What's the geographic breakdown of the cardinals who will elect the new pope? Newsletters World of Faith Comprehensive global coverage of how religion shapes our world. See All Newsletters Español TOP STORIES Israel aprueba planes para escalar sus campaña militar en Gaza, según funcionario Francisco abrió la Iglesia a los pueblos originarios. ¿Seguirán sus puertas abiertas? Pueblos indígenas marchan para crear conciencia sobre sus desaparecidos y asesinados Trump critica a la presidenta de México por rechazar envío de tropas de EEUU para combatir cárteles En nueva entrevista, Trump dice que no sabe si apoya los derechos al debido proceso Standards Quizzes Press Releases My Account The Associated Press is an independent global news organization dedicated to factual reporting. Founded in 1846, AP today remains the most trusted source of fast, accurate, unbiased news in all formats and the essential provider of the technology and services vital to the news business. More than half the world’s population sees AP journalism every day. twitter instagram facebook The Associated Press ap.org Careers Advertise with us Contact Us Accessibility Statement Terms of Use Privacy Policy Cookie Settings Do Not Sell or Share My Personal Information Limit Use and Disclosure of Sensitive Personal Information CA Notice of Collection More From AP News About AP News Values and Principles AP’s Role in Elections AP Leads AP Definitive Source Blog AP Images Spotlight Blog AP Stylebook The Associated Press ap.org Careers Advertise with us Contact Us Accessibility Statement Terms of Use Privacy Policy Cookie Settings Do Not Sell or Share My Personal Information Limit Use and Disclosure of Sensitive Personal Information CA Notice of Collection More From AP News About AP News Values and Principles AP’s Role in Elections AP Leads AP Definitive Source Blog AP Images Spotlight Blog AP Stylebook SECTIONS About AP News Values and Principles AP’s Role in Elections AP Leads AP Definitive Source Blog AP Images Spotlight Blog AP Stylebook Copyright 2025 The Associated Press. All Rights Reserved. Ukrainian energy firm hires Biden son as lawyer Ukrainian energy firm hires Biden son as lawyer 1 of 3 | FILE - In this Oct. 11, 2012, file photo Hunter Biden waits for the start of the his father’s, Vice President Joe Biden’s, debate at Centre College in Danville, Ky. Hunter Biden is expressing regret for being discharged from the Navy Reserve amid published reports that he tested positive for cocaine. The Wall Street Journal reports that Hunter Biden failed the drug test last year and was discharged in February. In a statement issued Thursday, Oct. 16, Biden doesn’t say why he was discharged. He says he’s embarrassed that his actions led to his discharge and that he respects the Navy’s decision.(AP Photo/Pablo Martinez Monsivais, File) Read More 2 of 3 | FILE - This Dec. 4, 2013, file photo shows U.S. Vice President Joe Biden, left, arriving on Air Force Two in Beijing, China, with his son Hunter Biden, right, and his granddaughter Finnegan Biden. As the Vice President travels to Ukraine Saturday, June 7, 2014, his youngest son, Hunter, 44, has been hired by a private Ukrainian company that promotes energy independence from Russia, but is commercially active in the breakaway Russian-backed state of Crimea and owned by a former government minister with ties to Ukraine’s ousted pro-Russian president. (AP Photo/Ng Han Guan, Pool) Read More 3 of 3 | From left, U.S. Vice President Joe Biden, U.S. Sen. John McCain, R-Ariz., and Rep. Marcy Kaptur, D-Ohio, attend the inauguration ceremony of Ukraine’s new President Petro Poroshenko in Kiev, Ukraine, Saturday, June 7, 2014. Petro Poroshenko took the oath of office as Ukraine’s president Saturday, assuming leadership of a country mired in a violent uprising and economic troubles. (AP Photo/Sergei Chuzavkov) Read More By Stephen Braun Share Share Facebook Copy Link copied Print Email X LinkedIn Bluesky Flipboard Pinterest Reddit WASHINGTON (AP) — U.S. Vice President Joe Biden’s visit Saturday to support Ukraine’s fragile democracy came soon after his youngest son was hired by a private Ukrainian company that promotes energy independence from Moscow. Yet that company leases natural gas fields in the breakaway Russian-backed state of Crimea and is owned by a former government minister with ties to Ukraine’s ousted pro-Russian president. The hiring of Hunter Biden, 44, by Burisma Holdings Limited in April was approved by the company’s owner, a former senior minister and political ally of Viktor Yanukovych, the exiled Ukrainian president. Yanukovych fled to Russia in February after protests erupted over his efforts to establish closer economic ties with Moscow. Hunter Biden’s employment means he will be working as a director and top lawyer for a Ukrainian energy company during the period when his father and others in the Obama administration attempt to influence the policies of Ukraine’s new government, especially on energy issues. There’s no indication that Hunter Biden, his father or Burisma are crossing any legal or ethical lines, although ethics experts appear divided over the implications of Hunter Biden’s new job. American conflict-of-interest laws and federal ethics rules essentially do not regulate the business activities of adult relatives of those who work in the White House. “The primary problem here is the fact that Hunter Biden has set up a financial arrangement with someone who might have business pending before this administration,” said Craig Holman, an ethics expert with Public Citizen, a Washington-based government reform organization. Joe Biden led the U.S. delegation at Saturday’s inauguration of Ukraine’s new president, Petro Poroshenko, and announced $48 million in additional aid for the Kiev government. Biden met Poroshenko and said “there is a window for peace and you know as well as anyone that it will not stay open indefinitely ... America is with you.” Ukraine is an important natural-gas and petroleum-liquids transit country. Two major pipeline systems carry Russian gas through Ukraine to Western Europe. Burisma is headed by Nikolai Zlochevskyi, who held senior posts over natural resources, environment and defense in Ukraine. The company has aggressively bought up Ukrainian oil and natural gas leases and companies. Hunter Biden’s new company says it aims to reduce Ukraine’s dependence on Russian gas and oil, a goal that parallels U.S. efforts to aid Ukraine’s energy industry. As a Burisma director and the company’s top lawyer, the younger Biden has yet to take any public actions on behalf of the company. But the timing of his hiring is politically awkward for the administration’s efforts to shore up Ukraine’s pro-Western government, and poses potential complications from Burisma’s growing energy interests and the background of Hunter Biden’s new boss, Zlochevskyi. At least two oil and natural gas fields leased by subsidiaries of Burisma are in Ukrainian territories where pro-Russian sentiments remain strong, according to government and media releases, independent energy maps and Burisma’s website. One is in the breakaway Russian-backed state of Crimea; the other is in the eastern Ukrainian Kharkiv region. Instability there could force the younger Biden’s new company to coordinate with pro-Russian separatists whom the U.S. considers illegitimate. White House officials declined to comment on Hunter Biden’s association with Burisma and the company’s holdings in Crimea and east Ukraine. The vice president’s spokeswoman, Kendra Barkoff, previously said that Biden’s son is a private citizen and a lawyer, and that Joe Biden “does not endorse any particular company and has no involvement with this company.” Presidents and vice presidents have long been vexed by relatives rewarded for family ties. Political loan troubles shadowed Vice President Richard Nixon’s brother, Donald, during the 1960 election, and President Jimmy Carter’s brother, Billy, who accepted a $220,000 stipend in 1981 from Libya’s Moammar Gadhafi. In recent years, several Bush and Clinton relatives were caught in a string of murky financial and political dealings. But “unless there’s solid evidence that Hunter Biden got his job to influence American foreign policy, there’s no clear line that’s been crossed,” said Melanie Sloan, executive director of the Citizens for Responsibility and Ethics in Washington. A former Washington lobbyist, the vice president’s son is effectively exempt from most rules that would require him to describe publicly the legal work he does on behalf of Burisma. Hunter Biden will not lobby for the company, said Lawrence Pacheco, an official with FTI Consulting, a Washington government affairs company recently hired by Burisma. Pacheco did not say whether Biden might oversee or advise on any future Burisma lobbying strategy in the U.S. Pacheco said the company “does not take positions on political matters.” But Biden’s company may have to deal with Ukrainian enclaves that the U.S. does not recognize diplomatically or are threatened by instability. One Burisma subsidiary, KrymTopEnergoServis, operates natural gas fields and has headquarters in the Crimea, which seceded from Ukraine this year and now aligns with Russia. A second subsidiary, Esco-Pivnich, produces oil and natural gas just west of Kharkiv, Ukraine’s second-largest city, which was the site of several protests and borders on separatist-controlled provinces. The company’s website confirms that Burisma operates oil and natural gas sites in Crimea and east Ukraine, as well as elsewhere in Ukraine. “While he’s just at the beginning of his involvement with this company, Ukraine is volatile right now and there are all sorts of problems that might crop up down the line,” said Bill Allison, the editorial director of the Sunlight Foundation, a nonpartisan watchdog group. Pacheco said the company’s western and eastern operations have been unaffected by Ukraine’s unrest but that its Crimea subsidiary is not operating currently. He did not explain further, but confirmed KrymTopEnergoServis is based and leases gas deposits in Crimea. Hunter Biden, Zlochevskyi and other company officials would not comment publicly, Pacheco said. Hunter Biden is a managing director with Rosemont Seneca Partners, a private equity firm, and worked as a Washington lobbyist for seven years until his father was elected vice president. He lobbied primarily for colleges, hospitals and tech firms. Pacheco said Biden’s son came to Burisma’s attention after he was introduced by Devon Archer, another new Burisma board member, to Alan Apter, Burisma’s board chairman. Archer works with Hunter Biden at Rosemont and was a top fundraiser for now-Secretary of State John Kerry when Kerry ran for president in 2004. Zlochevskyi approved Biden’s hiring, Pacheco said. Zlochevskyi, 48, worked as minister of natural resources and environment under Yanukovych and most recently was deputy secretary of Ukraine’s national security and defense council, which advised Yanukovych on defense matters. Zlochevskyi also served in the Ukrainian parliament from 2007 to 2011 as a member of the Party of Regions, the political party affiliated with Yanukovych and traditionally aligned with pro-Russian interests. Zlochevskyi’s name is missing from Burisma’s web site, but financial documents in Cyprus as well as U.S. Securities and Exchange records show that he owns the bulk of Burisma’s shares. Zlochevskyi’s Cyprus-based Brociti Investments Limited controls Burisma. Hunter Biden joined Burisma in April, the same month his father visited Kiev to show support for the new interim government. ___ Associated Press writers Menelaos Hadjicostis in Nicosia, Cyprus, and Laura Mills in Kiev contributed to this report. Most read Thousands of Islamists rally in Bangladesh against proposed changes to women’s rights Trump says he will reopen Alcatraz prison Trump, in a new interview, says he doesn’t know if he backs due process rights The Associated Press is an independent global news organization dedicated to factual reporting. Founded in 1846, AP today remains the most trusted source of fast, accurate, unbiased news in all formats and the essential provider of the technology and services vital to the news business. More than half the world’s population sees AP journalism every day. The Associated Press ap.org Careers Advertise with us Contact Us Accessibility Statement Terms of Use Privacy Policy Cookie Settings Do Not Sell or Share My Personal Information Limit Use and Disclosure of Sensitive Personal Information CA Notice of Collection More From AP News About AP News Values and Principles AP’s Role in Elections AP Leads AP Definitive Source Blog AP Images Spotlight Blog AP Stylebook The Associated Press ap.org Careers Advertise with us Contact Us Accessibility Statement Terms of Use Privacy Policy Cookie Settings Do Not Sell or Share My Personal Information Limit Use and Disclosure of Sensitive Personal Information CA Notice of Collection More From AP News About AP News Values and Principles AP’s Role in Elections AP Leads AP Definitive Source Blog AP Images Spotlight Blog AP Stylebook SECTIONS About AP News Values and Principles AP’s Role in Elections AP Leads AP Definitive Source Blog AP Images Spotlight Blog AP Stylebook Copyright 2025 The Associated Press. All Rights Reserved. twitter instagram facebookHunter Biden: What was he doing in China and Ukraine? Skip to content British Broadcasting Corporation Home News Sport Business Innovation Culture Arts Travel Earth Audio Video Live Home News Israel-Gaza War War in Ukraine US & Canada UK UK Politics England N. Ireland N. Ireland Politics Scotland Scotland Politics Wales Wales Politics Africa Asia China India Australia Europe Latin America Middle East In Pictures BBC InDepth BBC Verify Sport Business Executive Lounge Technology of Business Future of Business Innovation Technology Science & Health Artificial Intelligence AI v the Mind Culture Film & TV Music Art & Design Style Books Entertainment News Arts Arts in Motion Travel Destinations Africa Antarctica Asia Australia and Pacific Caribbean & Bermuda Central America Europe Middle East North America South America World’s Table Culture & Experiences Adventures The SpeciaList Earth Natural Wonders Weather & Science Climate Solutions Sustainable Business Green Living Audio Podcasts Radio Audio FAQs Video Live Live News Live Sport Home News Sport Business Innovation Culture Arts Travel Earth Audio Video Live Weather Newsletters Hunter Biden: What was he doing in China and Ukraine? 6 April 2021 Share Save Share Save Getty Images Vice-President Biden in 2016 with his son Hunter looking on Hunter Biden, second son of US President Joe Biden, is being investigated by the Justice Department over his finances including, according to US media reports, some of his business dealings in China. During the 2020 election campaign, he and his father were frequently accused by Donald Trump and his associates of wrongdoing in regards to China and Ukraine, allegations which they both denied. The New York Post reported on an alleged email in which an adviser from a Ukrainian energy company, Burisma, apparently thanked Hunter for inviting him to meet his father, Joe Biden. Asked about the allegations, Joe Biden told a reporter it was a "smear campaign". No criminal activity has been proven, and no evidence has emerged that Mr Biden did anything to intentionally benefit his son. In an interview with the BBC months after his father was sworn in as president, Hunter Biden defended his qualifications for the position at Burisma but added that, in retrospect, he had "missed... the perception that I would create". Claims of influence-peddling are common in Washington DC and Mr Trump's children have also been accused of conflicts of interest in lucrative business deals overseas. They, too, deny wrongdoing. What do we know about the federal investigation? The Justice Department is investigating Hunter Biden's finances including scrutinising some of his past Chinese business dealings and other transactions, a "person familiar with the matter" told The Associated Press in December . The tax investigation was launched in 2018 but Hunter Biden said he had learned about it for the first time in December 2020. Asked about the investigation by US broadcaster CBS this April, the president's son said: "I'm co-operating, completely. And I'm absolutely certain, 100% certain, that at the end of the investigation, that I will be cleared of any wrongdoing." What have the Bidens been accused of in China? The New York Post cited a purported email from Hunter Biden in August 2017 indicating he was receiving a $10m annual fee from a Chinese billionaire for "introductions alone", though it is unclear who was involved in the alleged introductions. Another purported email, which Fox News said it had confirmed, reportedly refers to a deal pursued by Hunter involving China's largest private energy firm. It is said to include a cryptic mention of "10 held by H for the big guy". Fox News cited unnamed sources as saying "the big guy" in the purported email was a reference to Joe Biden. This message is said to be from May 2017. Both emails would date from when the former US vice-president was a private citizen. A former business associate of Hunter Biden has come forward to say he can confirm the allegations. Tony Bobulinski told Fox News that, contrary to Joe Biden's statements that he had nothing to do with his son's business affairs, Hunter had "frequently referenced asking him for his sign-off or advice on various potential deals" in China. Mr Bobulinski, who is reportedly a US Navy veteran, separately told Fox News' Tucker Carlson that he had met on two occasions with Joe Biden to discuss business deals with China, the first time in May 2017 when Barack Obama's former vice-president was a private citizen. He says he asked Joe Biden's brother, James, whether the family was concerned about possible scrutiny of the former vice-president's involvement in a potential business deal with a Chinese entity. Mr Bobulinski told Fox News that James Biden had replied: "Plausible deniability." Mr Bobulinski was invited by Mr Trump to be his guest at the final presidential debate in Nashville, Tennessee on 22 October. What is known about Hunter's dealings in China? In 2013, Hunter flew aboard Air Force Two with his father, who was then vice-president, on an official visit to Beijing, where the younger Biden met investment banker Jonathan Li. Hunter told the New Yorker he had just met Mr Li for "a cup of coffee", but 12 days after the trip a private equity fund, BHR Partners, was approved by the Chinese authorities. Mr Li was chief executive and Hunter was a board member. He would hold a 10% stake. Getty Images Joe Biden walks out of Air Force Two with his granddaughter and son, Hunter Biden BHR is backed by some of China's largest state banks and by local governments, according to US media. Hunter Biden's lawyer said he had joined the board in an unpaid position "based on his interest in seeking ways to bring Chinese capital to international markets". His lawyer also said his client did not acquire his financial stake in BHR until 2017, after his father had left office in the US. Hunter resigned from the board of BHR in April 2020, but still held his 10% stake in BHR as of July this year, according to the company report. What did the New York Post say about Hunter Biden and Ukraine? The New York Post reported an email from April 2015, in which an adviser to Burisma, Vadym Pozharskyi, apparently thanked Hunter Biden for inviting him to meet his father in Washington. Hunter was a director on the board of Burisma - a Ukrainian-owned private energy company while his father was the Obama administration's pointman on US-Ukrainian relations. Hunter was one of several foreigners on its board. The New York Post article did not provide evidence that the meeting had ever taken place. The Biden election campaign said there was no record of any such meeting on the former vice-president's "official schedule" from the time. But in a statement to Politico , the campaign also acknowledged that Mr Biden could have had an "informal interaction" with the Burisma adviser that did not appear on his official schedule, though it said any such encounter would have been "cursory". "Investigations by the press, during impeachment, and even by two Republican-led Senate committees whose work was decried as 'not legitimate' and political by a GOP colleague, have all reached the same conclusion: that Joe Biden carried out official US policy toward Ukraine and engaged in no wrongdoing," said Andrew Bates, a spokesman for Mr Biden. What we know about Biden-Ukraine corruption claims Mr Biden's team has also decried the New York Post story as "Russian disinformation", though it did not say the emails were bogus. The New York Post article was shared by President Trump and his allies. Two of his former advisers, Steve Bannon and Rudy Giuliani, were involved in providing the story and the hard drive containing the alleged emails, to the newspaper. Mr Giuliani says the messages were found on a laptop that Hunter dropped off at a Delaware repair shop in April 2019. Sceptics have noted that Mr Giuliani travelled in December 2019 to Kyiv where he met Ukrainian lawmaker Andriy Derkach, whom the US Treasury has designated as a longtime Kremlin agent. Mr Giuliani has acknowledged trying dig up dirt on the Bidens in Ukraine. But the US Director of National Intelligence, John Ratcliffe, told Fox Business that the purported emails were not connected to a Russian disinformation effort. Other US media say they have been unable to verify the authenticity of the emails. Hunter has neither confirmed nor denied that he dropped off a laptop at the location. Hunter joined Burisma in 2014, and remained on the board until April 2019, when he decided to leave. Speaking to the BBC, he said Burisma had seen his name "as gold" and that it had played a large part in his appointment to the board. Twitter and Facebook's action over Joe Biden article reignites bias claims What are the Bidens accused of in Ukraine? Donald Trump and his allies accused Joe Biden of wrongdoing because he had pushed, while vice-president, for the Ukrainian government to fire its top prosecutor, who was investigating the company for which Hunter worked. In 2016, Joe Biden called for the dismissal of Ukrainian prosecutor Viktor Shokin, whose office had Burisma and other companies under investigation. However, other Western leaders and major bodies that give financial support to Ukraine also wanted the prosecutor dismissed because they believed he was not active enough in tackling corruption. What else has the Biden campaign said? Shortly before the final presidential debate last year, the Democrat's camp released a statement denying wrongdoing. "Joe Biden has never even considered being involved in business with his family, nor in any overseas business whatsoever," said the statement. "He has never held stock in any such business arrangements nor has any family member or any other person ever held stock for him. "What is true is that Tony Bobulinski admitted on the record to Breitbart that he is angry that he was *not* able to go into business with Hunter and James Biden [Joe Biden's brother]." What did this have to do with impeachment? In 2019, details emerged of a phone call Mr Trump, the then president, had made to the president of Ukraine, in which he had urged the Ukrainian leader to investigate the Bidens. President Trump's impeachment explained This led to charges by the Democrats that Mr Trump was trying to illegally pressure Ukraine to help damage his election rival, resulting in impeachment by the House of Representatives. Mr Trump denied he had done anything wrong, and he was later acquitted by the Republican-controlled US Senate. Getty Images President Trump holds a copy of The Washington Post the day after the US Senate acquitted him on two articles of impeachment Has anything been proven against the Bidens? While no criminal activity has been proven, it has raised questions about potential conflicts of interest. A senior State Department official raised such concerns as far back as 2015. Joe Biden's son defends foreign dealings US Republican lawmakers launched an investigation and found last year that Hunter's work for the Ukrainian firm had been "problematic" - but there wasn't evidence that US foreign policy was influenced by it. No criminal charges were proven against Burisma either. The company issued a statement in 2017 saying "all legal proceedings and pending criminal allegations" against it were closed. Last year, Yuriy Lutsenko, the prosecutor in Ukraine who succeeded Viktor Shokin, told the BBC that there was no reason to investigate the Bidens under Ukrainian law. There is nothing illegal about sitting on a board of a company whilst family members serve in government. Hunter Biden's lawyers said in statement in October 2019 that he had undertaken "these business activities independently. He did not believe it appropriate to discuss them with his father, nor did he." Hunter told the New Yorker magazine that on the only occasion he had mentioned Burisma: "Dad said, 'I hope you know what you are doing.'" Amid all the scrutiny, Joe Biden promised last year that if he was elected president, no-one in his family would hold a job or have a business relationship with a foreign corporation or foreign government. Impeachment of Donald Trump US election 2020 BBC Verify Hunter Biden Joe Biden Related Jeremy Bowen: Trump-Zelensky row signals looming crisis between Europe and US 1 Mar 2025 World 'The boss' featured at Trump hush-money trial 25 Apr 2024 US & Canada How did US impeachments go from rare to routine? 28 Sep 2023 US & Canada More 4 hrs ago Trump's former VP Mike Pence receives JFK Courage Award Pence defied calls by Donald Trump to overturn the result of the 2020 election, and was shunned by Republicans as a result. 4 hrs ago US & Canada 25 Apr 2025 What would it mean for Ukraine to temporarily give up land? As Ukraine reckons with the terms of a possible peace deal, BBC Verify asks what it could mean in practice. 25 Apr 2025 BBC Verify 16 Apr 2025 Watch: Biden attacks Trump in first speech since leaving White House The former US president says his successor has "done so much damage and so much destruction" in his first days in office. 16 Apr 2025 US & Canada 16 Apr 2025 Biden attacks Trump in first speech since leaving White House The ex-president uses the speech to criticise the Trump administration's cuts to the welfare agency. 16 Apr 2025 US & Canada 15 Apr 2025 Trump blames Zelensky for starting war after massive Russian attack The US president apportioned blame to Ukraine's leader hours after the deadliest strike on civilians this year. 15 Apr 2025 World British Broadcasting Corporation Home News Sport Business Innovation Culture Arts Travel Earth Audio Video Live Weather BBC Shop BritBox BBC in other languages Follow BBC on: Terms of Use About the BBC Privacy Policy Cookies Accessibility Help Contact the BBC Advertise with us Do not share or sell my info Contact technical support Copyright 2025 BBC. All rights reserved. The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites. Read about our approach to external linking.

The Energy Company At The Center Of The Trump-Ukraine Controversy : NPR Accessibility links Skip to main content Keyboard shortcuts for audio player Open Navigation Menu Newsletters NPR Shop Close Navigation Menu Home News Expand/collapse submenu for News National World Politics Business Health Science Climate Race Culture Expand/collapse submenu for Culture Books Movies Television Pop Culture Food Art & Design Performing Arts Life Kit Gaming Music Expand/collapse submenu for Music All Songs Considered Tiny Desk New Music Friday Music Features Live Sessions Podcasts & Shows Expand/collapse submenu for Podcasts & Shows Daily Morning Edition Weekend Edition Saturday Weekend Edition Sunday All Things Considered Fresh Air Up First Featured Embedded The NPR Politics Podcast Throughline Trump's Terms More Podcasts & Shows Search Newsletters NPR Shop All Songs Considered Tiny Desk New Music Friday Music Features Live Sessions About NPR Diversity Support Careers Press Ethics The Energy Company At The Center Of The Trump-Ukraine Controversy Despite advertising as one of Ukraine's biggest independent gas producers, the energy company where Joe Biden's son Hunter sat on the board, is registered in Cyprus and is invisible in Kyiv. Energy The Energy Company At The Center Of The Trump-Ukraine Controversy October 3, 2019 5:05 AM ET Heard on Morning Edition By Lucian Kim The Energy Company At The Center Of The Trump-Ukraine Controversy Listen · 3:52 3:52 Transcript Toggle more options Download Embed Embed < iframe src="https://www.npr.org/player/embed/766706878/766706879" width="100%" height="290" frameborder="0" scrolling="no" title="NPR embedded audio player"> Transcript Despite advertising as one of Ukraine's biggest independent gas producers, the energy company where Joe Biden's son Hunter sat on the board, is registered in Cyprus and is invisible in Kyiv. Sponsor Message NOEL KING, HOST: Hunter Biden served for about five years on the board of a Ukrainian energy company. For part of that time, his father, Joe Biden, was the Obama administration's point man on Ukraine. That led President Trump to call for a Ukrainian investigation into the Bidens. And that is how we got to the impeachment inquiry. NPR's Lucian Kim went to Kyiv to look into the Ukrainian company that Hunter Biden worked for. LUCIAN KIM, BYLINE: Practically all of Ukraine's powerful businessmen have natural gas interests, and Mykola Zlochevsky is no exception. He founded the company Burisma. It grew into one of Ukraine's largest private natural gas producers whilst Zlochevsky served as Ukraine's environment minister in charge of handing out drilling licenses. ALEXANDER PARASCHIY: Of course, during his time of being a minister, he had a lot of power. And he was able to consolidate some small companies which were producing natural gas. KIM: That's Alexander Paraschiy, the chief of research at the Ukrainian investment bank Concorde Capital. After the bloody revolution on Kyiv's streets five years ago, Mykola Zlochevsky, like many other government officials, fled the country. Burisma was facing a money laundering investigation and questions over how it had obtained its licenses. Again, Alexander Paraschiy. PARASCHIY: Hiring some reputable guys with recognition in the world is one of the easiest and maybe cheapest ways to protect your business in Ukraine. KIM: Burisma appointed Hunter Biden, son of then-Vice President Joe Biden, to its board of directors. A former president of Poland also joined the board. DARIA KALENIUK: I believe the only reason Burisma and Zlochevsky were inviting people with such names was to whitewash their reputation and to present themselves as the company which is doing legitimate business in Ukraine. KIM: Daria Kaleniuk is the head of the Anti-Corruption Action Center, an advocacy group in Kyiv. KALENIUK: I haven't seen any evidence of Hunter Biden doing something illegal in Ukraine or outside of Ukraine. I think what he did was unethical, for sure. KIM: In other words, the appearance of a conflict of interest arose because Hunter Biden's father, Joe Biden, was responsible for U.S. policy on Ukraine as vice president. But Joe Biden, like many other Western leaders, was criticizing Ukraine exactly because it failed to convict a single high-level official for corruption, including Mykola Zlochevsky, the owner of Burisma. As for Burisma, the company has continued to try burnishing its reputation. In 2017, it added another American to its board, Cofer Black, a former CIA official and a foreign policy adviser to Mitt Romney's presidential campaign. (SOUNDBITE OF MUSIC) KIM: In a promotional video, Burisma presents itself as a company on the rise. (SOUNDBITE OF ARCHIVED RECORDING) UNIDENTIFIED NARRATOR: Burisma is striving to become an active market player across Europe, as well as worldwide, and to stand out by virtue of its value and experience. KIM: But for a company with global ambitions, it's hardly transparent. Burisma is registered in Cyprus, keeps a low profile in Kyiv and has ignored NPR's repeated requests for comment. Nobody knows where its owner, Mykola Zlochevsky, lives. But behind the scenes, he's continuing to buy influence. Burisma supports the Atlantic Council, a Washington think tank, and hosts an annual energy conference on the French Riviera attended by the prince of Monaco and former European and U.S. government officials. Hunter Biden, for one, no longer works at Burisma. He left the company earlier this year as his father was launching his presidential campaign. Lucian Kim, NPR News, Kyiv. (SOUNDBITE OF SLEEP MAPS' "BIOLOGIC TRUST") Copyright © 2019 NPR. All rights reserved. Visit our website terms of use and permissions pages at www.npr.org for further information. Accuracy and availability of NPR transcripts may vary. Transcript text may be revised to correct errors or match updates to audio. Audio on npr.org may be edited after its original broadcast or publication. The authoritative record of NPR’s programming is the audio record. Facebook Flipboard Email Read & Listen Home News Culture Music Podcasts & Shows Connect Newsletters Facebook Instagram Press Public Editor Corrections Contact & Help About NPR Overview Diversity NPR Network Accessibility Ethics Finances Get Involved Support Public Radio Sponsor NPR NPR Careers NPR Shop NPR Events NPR Extra Terms of Use Privacy Your Privacy Choices Text Only Sponsor Message Sponsor Message Become an NPR sponsor

What Pam Bondi's RNC attacks on Hunter Biden got right — and wrong Is US safer from guns? Start the day smarter ☀️ Science of snowflakes Get the USA TODAY app U.S. Politics Sports Entertainment Life Money Travel Opinion Crossword ONLY AT USA TODAY: Newsletters For Subscribers From the Archives Crossword eNewspaper Magazines Investigations Podcasts Video Humankind WITNESS (True Crime) Just Curious Best-selling Booklist Legals OUR PORTFOLIO: 10BEST USAT Savings Shopping Blueprint WITNESS (True Crime) Southern Kitchen Home Internet POLITICS 2020 Republican National Convention Add Topic What Pam Bondi's attacks on Hunter Biden got right — and wrong Tom Vanden Brook Kevin Johnson USA TODAY Pam Bondi, the former Florida attorney general, made several assertions Tuesday about shady business dealings by Hunter Biden, the son of Democratic presidential nominee Joe Biden. Some of Bondi's remarks to the Republican National Convention were accurate, others were misleading. Bondi attacked the Bidens for their work in Ukraine when Vice President Biden led the U.S. government's anti-corruption campaign in Ukraine, and Hunter Biden secured a lucrative post on the board of a gas company there. "We all know about Joe’s son, Hunter Biden," Bondi said Tuesday. "A corrupt Ukrainian oligarch put Hunter on the board of his gas company, even though he had no experience in Ukraine or in the energy sector. None. Yet he was paid millions to do nothing." Hunter Biden was on the board from 2014 to 2019 of Burisma Holdings, Ukraine's largest gas company for which he was paid as much$50,000 per month, according to the New York Times. Bondi's statement that Hunter Biden lacked experience in the energy sector is accurate. However, there is no evidence that Hunter Biden was involved in wrongdoing. Nor is it unusual for Ukrainian companies to burnish their credentials by placing prominent people on their boards , according to a former U.S. diplomat . For example, Cofer Black, who served as George W. Bush's CIA counterterrorism chief, joined Burisma's board in 2017. Joe Biden has acknowledged that his son's work in Ukraine had created the appearance of a conflict of interest and that his son regretted taking the seat on the board. "He said he regretted having done it," Biden said on NBC earlier this year. "Speaks for himself. He's a grown man." Hunter Biden acknowledged in an interview with ABC that he likely would not have been offered the job had his father not been vice president. However, he said he served the company honorably and had done nothing improper. Bondi also re-aired a false claim that Joe Biden pressured Ukraine to fire a prosecutor who had investigated Burisma. "Recently reported information revealed that a few months after Hunter Biden joined that corrupt company’s board, the Obama-Biden State Department began doing business with them, even when it remained under investigation for corruption," Bondi said. "And it gets worse: that very same company was being investigated by a Ukrainian prosecutor. Joe Biden, the vice president of the United States, threatened to withhold aid to Ukraine unless that same prosecutor was fired, and then he was fired." Bondi toes the line here, suggesting the reason Joe Biden pressured Ukraine to fire the prosecutor was to protect his son. That assertion has been debunked. Biden forced out the prosecutor for the opposite reason. Not because Viktor Shokin had been investigating Burisma but Shokin hadn't pursued corruption among the country's politicians. Shokin's inaction prompted international calls for his ouster and ultimately resulted in his removal by Ukraine's parliament. Moreover, Shokin's office had investigated Burisma, but the probe focused on a period before Hunter Biden joined the company, according to the country's anti-corruption bureau. Left unsaid by Bondi is President Trump's impeachment by the House of Representatives for pressuring Ukraine's president to investigate Joe Biden by withholding military aid and a White House visit. The Senate acquitted Trump. Bondi also used the convention stage to re-air claims about the younger Biden’s business interests in China, suggesting that the Chinese sought to curry favor with the Obama administration. The former Florida attorney general said Biden, while vice president, traveled to China with “Hunter along for the ride.” “In Beijing, Hunter didn’t just go sightseeing. He had meetings with his Chinese bank partners,” Bondi said. “Hunter even arranged for his dad to meet with one of the partners. Ten days later, those Chinese communist bankers approved millions to go to Hunter’s firm and those bankers work for the Chinese Communist Party, which oppresses their people, cheated American workers for decades and covered up a deadly virus. To this day, Hunter controls a 10% stake in that firm.” It is true that Hunter Biden traveled to Beijing with his father in 2013. While in the Chinese capital, according to an account in the New Yorker, Hunter Biden arranged for his father to meet China-based business associate Jonathan Li, linked to the investment firm, BHR, where the younger Biden served as a board member. “Afterward, Hunter and Li had what both parties described as a social meeting,” the New Yorker reported. “How do I go to Beijing, halfway around the world, and not see them for a cup of coffee?” he said. Hunter Biden’s attorney George Mesires said that his client, who resigned his post last year, had not received any compensation for being on the BHR board, nor did he receive any equity in it while Joe Biden was vice president. The former vice president’s son also has pledged not serve on boards of foreign companies if his father is elected president. Featured Weekly Ad About Us Newsroom Staff Ethical Principles USA TODAY Network Style Guide Responsible Disclosure Request a Correction Press Releases Accessibility Sitemap Subscription Terms & Conditions Advertiser Acceptance Policy Terms of Service Privacy Policy Your Privacy Choices Contact Us Help Center Manage Account Give Feedback Get Home Delivery eNewspaper USA TODAY Shop USA TODAY Print Editions Licensing & Reprints Advertise With Us Careers Internships Support Local Business News Tips Submitting letters to the editor Podcasts Newsletters Mobile Apps Facebook X Instagram LinkedIn Threads YouTube Reddit Flipboard 10BEST USAT Savings Shopping Best-selling Booklist Southern Kitchen Jobs Sports Betting Sports Weekly Studio Gannett Classifieds Home Internet Blueprint WITNESS (True Crime) © 2025 USA TODAY, a division of Gannett Satellite Information Network, LLC.The Bidens’ Influence Peddling Timeline - United States House Committee on Oversight and Accountability Skip to main content Toggle navigation Search About Chairman James Comer Full Committee Rules Committee Activity Calendar Hearings Letters Markups Reports Forums Subcommittees Cybersecurity, Information Technology, and Government Innovation Economic Growth, Energy Policy, and Regulatory Affairs Government Operations Health Care and Financial Services Military and Foreign Affairs Federal Law Enforcement Delivering on Government Efficiency Task Force on the Declassification of Federal Secrets Media Center Press Releases The Overview Biden Family Investigation The Bidens’ Influence Peddling Timeline Biden's Border Crisis COVID Origins Blow the Whistle The Bidens’ Influence Peddling Timeline Since taking the gavel in January, the Committee on Oversight and Accountability has accelerated its investigation of the Biden family’s domestic and international business practices to determine whether the Biden family has been targeted by foreign actors, President Biden is compromised, and our national security is threatened. Records obtained through the Committee’s subpoenas to date reveal that the Bidens and their associates have received over $20 million in payments from foreign entities. Below is a timeline that details key dates in our investigation. The main points of interest are: 1) Romania: On September 28, 2015, Vice President Biden welcomed Romanian President Klaus Iohannis to the White House. Within five weeks of this meeting, a Romanian businessman involved with a high-profile corruption prosecution in Romania, Gabriel Popoviciu, began depositing a Biden associate’s bank account, which ultimately made their way into Biden family accounts. Popoviciu made sixteen of the seventeen payments, totaling over $3 million, to the Biden associate account while Joe Biden was Vice President. Biden family accounts ultimately received approximately $1.038 million. The total amount from Romania to the Biden family and their associates is over $3 million. 2) China- CEFC: On March 1, 2017—less than two months after Vice President Joe Biden left public office—State Energy HK Limited, a Chinese company, wired $3 million to a Biden associate’s account. This is the same bank account used in the above “Romania” section. After the Chinese company wired the Biden associate account the $3 million, the Biden family received approximately $1,065,692 over a three-month period in different bank accounts. Additionally, the CEFC Chairman gives Hunter Biden a diamond worth $80,000. Lastly, CEFC creates a joint venture with the Bidens in the summer of 2017. The timeline lays out the “WhatsApp” messages and subsequent wires from the Chinese to the Bidens of $100,000 and $5 million. The total amount from China, specifically with CEFC and their related entities, to the Biden family and their associates is over $8 million. 3) Kazakhstan: On April 22, 2014, Kenes Rakishev, a Kazakhstani oligarch used his Singaporean entity, Novatus Holdings, to wire one of Hunter Biden’s Rosemont Seneca entities $142,300. The very next day—April 23, 2014—the Rosemont Seneca entity transferred the exact same amount of money to a car dealership for a car for Hunter Biden. Hunter Biden and Devon Archer would represent Burisma in Kazakhstan in May/June of 2014 as the company attempted to broker a three-way deal among Burisma, the Kazakhstan government, and a Chinese state-owned energy company. 4) Ukraine: Devon Archer joined the Burisma board of directors in spring of 2014 and was joined by Hunter Biden shortly thereafter. Hunter Biden joined the company as counsel, but after a meeting with Burisma owner Mykola Zlochevsky in Lake Como, Italy, was elevated to the board of directors in the spring of 2014. Both Biden and Archer were each paid $1 million per year for their positions on the board of directors. In December 2015, after a Burisma board of directors meeting, Zlochevsky and Hunter Biden “called D.C.” in the wake of mounting pressures the company was facing. Zlochevsky was later charged with bribing Ukrainian officials with $6 million in an attempt to delay or drop the investigation into his company. The total amount from Ukraine to the Biden family and their associates is $6.5 million. 5) Russia: On February 14, 2014, a Russian oligarch and Russia’s richest woman, Yelena Baturina, wired a Rosemont Seneca entity $3.5 million. On March 11, 2014, the wire was split up: $750,000 was transferred to Devon Archer, and the remainder was sent to Rosemont Seneca Bohai, a company Devon Archer and Hunter Biden split equally. In spring of 2014, Yelena Baturina joined Hunter Biden and Devon Archer to share a meal with then-Vice President Biden at a restaurant in Washington, D.C. The total amount from Russia to the Biden family and their associates is $3.5 million. Beyond this timeline, here are links to our First , Second , Third , and Fourth Bank Memorandums that provide detailed descriptions and show actual bank records and wires. Biden Family Timeline China – BHR China- CEFC Hunter Biden Criminal Investigation Kazakhstan Romania Russia Ukraine 2009 January 20, 2009 Important Date Obama-Biden Administration begins. 2013 November 1, 2013 China – BHR Hunter Biden, business associate, and Chinese investors agree to create Bohai Harvest RST Equity Investment Fund Management Co., Ltd. (BHR), an investment fund controlled by the Bank of China, to focus on mergers and acquisitions, and investment in and reforms of state-owned enterprise. December 4, 2013 China – BHR Vice President Biden travels with Hunter Biden on Air Force 2 to China and meets CEO of BHR, Jonathan Li. Shortly thereafter, BHR’s business license was approved and Hunter Biden was a board member. 2014 February 5, 2014 Kazakhstan Hunter Biden met Kazakhstani oligarch Kenes Rakishev at the Hay Adams Hotel in Washington, D.C. In email correspondences with Devon Archer surrounding the meeting, Rakishev requested Secretary of State John Kerry visit Kazakhstan. Archer replied, “if we have some business started as planned I will ensure its planned soonest.” Rakishev is a Kazakhstani oligarch and millionaire and was a director at Kazakhstan’s state-owned oil company KazMunayGas. Rakishev maintained close ties to Karim Massimov, who became prime minister on April 2, 2014. February 14, 2014 Russia Russian oligarch Yelena Baturina – the wealthiest woman in Russia and then married to the former mayor of Moscow—wired the Rosemont Seneca Thornton bank account $3.5 million. Rosemont Seneca Thornton’s beneficiary was Rosemont Seneca Partners, of which Hunter Biden was the chairman. March 11, 2014 Russia Rosemont Seneca Thornton transferred $2,752,711 to a Rosemont Seneca Bohai bank account. Also on March 11, 2014, $750,000 of the original wire from Baturina was sent to Devon Archer from Rosemont Seneca Thornton. Rosemont Seneca Bohai was an entity used by both Hunter Biden and Devon Archer. In his testimony to the Committee, Archer confirmed that he and Hunter Biden were 50-50 owners in Rosemont Seneca Bohai. Rosemont Seneca Bohai was opened in Delaware on February 13, 2014—the day before the $3.5 million wire from Yelena Baturina. The bank records can be found in the third bank records memo. April 1, 2014 Russia and Kazakhstan In the spring of 2014, after Yelena Baturina sent the $3.5 million wire to Rosemont Seneca Thornton and around the same time that Kenes Rakishev wired money to Rosemont Seneca Bohai for Hunter Biden’s sportscar, Vice President Biden attended dinner with Yelena Baturina, Kenes Rakishev, Karim Massimov, Hunter Biden, Devon Archer, and others at Café Milano in Washington, D.C. Joe Biden stayed for dinner. Devon Archer provided this information during his transcribed interview . April 15, 2014 Ukraine Burisma, a Ukrainian energy company, appoints Biden business associate to their board of directors. April 22, 2014 Kazakhstan Kenes Rakishev’s Singaporean company wires $142,300 through his Latvian company to a Rosemont entity. The details can be found in the third bank records memorandum . April 22, 2014 Ukraine Vice President Biden travels to Ukraine and gives an anti-corruption speech. April 23, 2014 Kazakhstan The Rosemont entity wires $142,300 to a car dealership in New Jersey for a new sports car for Hunter Biden. The details can be found in the third bank records memorandum . May 12, 2014 Ukraine Burisma announces Hunter Biden joined its board of directors. May 21, 2014 Romania Vice President Biden visits Romania and delivers a speech to the Romanian Prime Minister, judges, prosecutors, and leaders of the Romanian Parliament. September 12, 2014 China – BHR BHR invests $1.7 billion in CCP-linked petroleum and chemical company. December 9, 2014 China – BHR Hunter Biden and business associate invest $484,920 into BHR. December 22, 2014 Kazakhstan Kenes Rakishev’s Kazakhstani oil company and Burisma join with a CCP-linked company and announce a transnational financial arrangement. 2015 April 16, 2015 Ukraine and Kazakhstan On April 16, 2015, Vice President Joe Biden attended a dinner with Karim Massimov, Vadym Pozharsky, Hunter Biden, Devon Archer, and others at Café Milano in Washington, D.C. Devon Archer provided this information during his transcribed interview . September 15, 2015 China – BHR BHR joins with a CCP-linked entity to acquire US-based Henniges Automotive in a deal reportedly worth $600 million. September 28, 2015 Romania Vice President Biden welcomes Romanian President Klaus Iohannis to the White House. A readout of the meeting states, the “Vice President welcomed President Iohannis’ focus on anti-corruption efforts and rule of law as a means to strengthen national security and promote greater investment and economic growth.” President Iohannis said the Vice President “voiced satisfaction over Romania’s progress with the fight against corruption.” November 2, 2015 Ukraine Vadym Pozharskyi suggests high level U.S. level officials come to Ukraine and talk with Prosecutor General Viktor Shokin and President Petro Poroshenko about Mykola Zlochevsky’s investigations. Prosecutor General Shokin was investigating Burisma and Burisma’s owner, Zlochevsky for fraud. Prosecutor General Shokin is the Ukranian government official Vice President Biden demanded Poroshenko fire. November 5, 2015 Romania Romanian businessman, Gabriel Popoviciu, begins making deposits into Robinson Walker, LLC’s bank account. Robinson Walker, LLC is an entity owned by a Biden associate, Rob Walker. Popoviciu’s company sent Robinson Walker the first wire for $179,836.86. From November 2015 to May 2017, Popoviciu’s company paid Robinson Walker, LLC over $3 million. Biden family accounts received approximately $1.038 million from the Robinson Walker, LLC account after Popoviciu’s deposits. Sixteen of the seventeen payments from Popoviciu’s company to Robinson Walker, LLC were made while Joe Biden was Vice President. Details can be found in the Second Bank Records Memorandum . November 6, 2015 Ukraine Amos Hochstein, a high level U.S. government offical working in the Obama-Biden Administration, meets with Hunter Biden and discusses Burisma. November 9, 2015 Romania Rob Walker’s account wires Hunter Biden $59,900. Details can be found in the Second Bank Records Memorandum. November 11, 2015 Ukraine Amos Hochstein meets with Vice President Biden in the West Wing. November 12, 2015 Ukraine Amos Hochstein calls Hunter Biden. November 13, 2015 Romania Hunter Biden meets with the U.S. Ambassador to Romania. November 13, 2015 Ukraine VP Biden touched down in Ukraine last night. Read his initial notes from the road: https://t.co/FdPysDjiqT pic.twitter.com/ybZFp7frYe — VP Biden (Archived) (@VP44) December 7, 2015 Vice President Biden announces trip to Ukraine to take place the first week of December 2015. November 14, 2015 Ukraine Vadym Pozharskyi emails Hunter Biden confirmation that the Vice President will be traveling to Ukraine. November 14, 2015 Romania Hunter Biden meets with the Ambassador of Romania to the United States. November 15, 2015 Romania Hunter Biden travels to Romania. December 4, 2015 Ukraine Mykola Zlochevsky and Vadym Pozharsky complain about constant “government pressures” and urge Hunter Biden to call the Vice President of the United States, Joe Biden. Devon Archer testified that Hunter Biden, Zlochevsky, and Pozharsky “called D.C.” Devon Archer provided this information during his transcribed interview . December 7, 2015 China – CEFC Hunter Biden and CEFC Chairman Ye Jianming begin communicating regarding a possible U.S. partnership. December 7, 2015 Romania Robinson Walker, LLC wires Hunter Biden $59,725. Details can be found in the Second Bank Records Memorandum. December 7, 2015 Ukraine https://oversight.house.gov/wp-content/uploads/2023/07/Biden-Firing-Ukraine-Prosecutor-Clip.mp4 Vice President Biden arrives in Ukraine, where he demands Prosecutor General Shokin be fired if Ukraine wants $1 billion in International Monetary Fund (IMF) loans. December 9, 2015 Ukraine Vice President Biden departs Ukraine and gets a commitment from President Poroshenko that Prosecutor General Shokin will be fired. December 17, 2015 Ukraine Vice President Biden hosts a holiday party at the Vice Presidential residence, which Amos Hochstein and Hunter Biden both attend. December 23, 2015 Romania Robinson Walker, LLC wires Hunter Biden $60,091.24. Details can be found in the Second Bank Records Memorandum . 2016 January 20, 2016 Ukraine Vice President Biden meets with President Poroshenko in Switzerland at the World Economic Forum where Biden reinforced the linkage between the loan guarantee and the necessary reforms. February 4, 2016 Ukraine Mykola Zlochevsky gives Hunter Biden unspecified, extravagant birthday gifts. February 11, 2016 Ukraine Vice President Biden and President Poroshenko conduct a call. February 12, 2016 Romania Robinson Walker, LLC wires Hunter Biden’s Owasco P.C. $61,126.24. Details can be found in the Second Bank Records Memorandum. February 16, 2016 Ukraine President Poroshenko asks Prosecutor General Shokin to resign. February 18, 2016 Ukraine Vice President Biden calls President Poroshenko to thank him for calling on Prosecutor General Shokin to resign. February 19, 2016 Ukraine President Poroshenko says he recieved Prosecutor General Shokin’s letter of resignation. March 24, 2016 Romania Robinson Walker, LLC wires Owasco P.C. $61,816.05. Details can be found in the Second Bank Records Memorandum. March 29, 2016 Romania Hunter Biden meets again with U.S. Ambassador to Romania. March 29, 2016 Ukraine Ukranian Parliament approves President Poroshenko’s firing of Prosecutor General Shokin. May 23, 2016 Romania Robinson Walker, LLC wires Owasco P.C. $123,830.80. Details can be found in the Second Bank Records Memorandum. May 23, 2016 Romania Robinson Walker, LLC wires Owasco P.C. $53,419.74. Details can be found in the Second Bank Records Memorandum. July 11, 2016 Romania Robinson Walker, LLC wires Owasco P.C. $116,860.93. Details can be found in the Second Bank Records Memorandum. Load More Share via Email About Chairman James Comer Full Committee Rules Committee Activity Calendar Hearings Letters Markups Reports Forums Subcommittees Cybersecurity, Information Technology, and Government Innovation Economic Growth, Energy Policy, and Regulatory Affairs Government Operations Health Care and Financial Services Military and Foreign Affairs Federal Law Enforcement Delivering on Government Efficiency Task Force on the Declassification of Federal Secrets Media Center Press Releases The Overview Biden Family Investigation The Bidens’ Influence Peddling Timeline Biden's Border Crisis COVID Origins Blow the Whistle Minority © 2025 Committee on Oversight and Government Reform Privacy Policy 2157 Rayburn House Office Building Washington, DC 20515 Phone: (202) 225-5074 Fax: (202) 225-3974 Search About Chairman James Comer Full Committee Rules Committee Activity Calendar Hearings Letters Markups Reports Forums Subcommittees Cybersecurity, Information Technology, and Government Innovation Economic Growth, Energy Policy, and Regulatory Affairs Government Operations Health Care and Financial Services Military and Foreign Affairs Federal Law Enforcement Delivering on Government Efficiency Task Force on the Declassification of Federal Secrets Media Center Press Releases The Overview Biden Family Investigation The Bidens’ Influence Peddling Timeline Biden's Border Crisis COVID Origins Blow the Whistle

Hunter Biden - Wikipedia Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Early life and education 2 Early career 3 Investing, lobbying, and philanthropy Toggle Investing, lobbying, and philanthropy subsection 3.1 BHR Partners 3.2 Burisma Holdings 4 Investigations and federal indictments Toggle Investigations and federal indictments subsection 4.1 Firearms trial and convictions 4.2 Tax indictment and guilty pleas 4.3 Pardon of criminal offenses 4.4 Laptop files 4.5 Navy Reserve 5 Work as an artist 6 Presidency of Joe Biden Toggle Presidency of Joe Biden subsection 6.1 Litigation 7 Later life 8 Personal life Toggle Personal life subsection 8.1 Relationships 8.2 Drug and alcohol abuse 8.3 Memoir 9 References 10 External links Toggle the table of contents Hunter Biden 35 languages العربية تۆرکجه 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gú Català Čeština Deutsch Español فارسی Français Gaeilge 한국어 Հայերեն Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua Italiano עברית Kiswahili Latviešu مصرى Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Português Русский Simple English کوردی Српски / srpski Suomi Svenska Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read View source View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read View source View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia American businessman and lobbyist (born 1970) Hunter Biden Biden in 2014 Born Robert Hunter Biden ( 1970-02-04 ) February 4, 1970 (age 55) Wilmington, Delaware , U.S. Education Georgetown University ( BA ) Yale University ( JD ) Spouses Kathleen Buhle ​ ​ ( m. 1993; div. 2017) ​ Melissa Cohen ​ ( m. 2019) ​ Children 5 Parents Joe Biden Neilia Hunter Biden Relatives Biden family Military career Service / branch United States Navy Years of service 2013–2014 Rank Lieutenant Unit U.S. Navy Reserve Robert Hunter Biden (born February 4, 1970) is an American attorney and businessman. He is the second son of former president Joe Biden and his first wife, Neilia Hunter Biden . Hunter Biden was a founding board member of BHR Partners , a Chinese investment company, in 2013, and later served on the board of Burisma Holdings , one of the largest private natural gas producers in Ukraine , from 2014 until his term expired in April 2019. He has worked as a lobbyist and legal representative for lobbying firms, a hedge fund principal, and a venture capital and private equity fund investor. Since early 2019, Hunter and his father have been the targets of false allegations that Joe pressured Ukraine to fire a prosecutor to protect Hunter , which intensified after the New York Post published an article in October 2020 about a laptop computer that had belonged to Hunter Biden . Biden was convicted of three federal firearms -related felony charges in June 2024 after he had admitted to illegally owning a gun while a drug user. His tax affairs have been under federal criminal investigation since late 2018, and in September 2024, he pled guilty to all of the tax charges. In December 2024, Biden's father pardoned him for all federal offenses committed between 2014 and 2024, including any potential offenses not yet discovered. Early life and education Further information: Biden family Biden as a child, c. 1980s Robert Hunter Biden was born on February 4, 1970, [ 1 ] in Wilmington, Delaware . He is the second son of Neilia Biden (née Hunter) and Joe Biden . [ 2 ] Hunter Biden's mother and younger sister Naomi were killed in an automobile crash on December 18, 1972. [ 3 ] [ 4 ] Biden and his older brother Beau were also seriously injured but survived. Beau suffered multiple broken bones while Hunter sustained a fractured skull and severe traumatic brain injuries. [ 5 ] Both spent several months in the hospital, during which time their father was sworn into the U.S. Senate in January 1973. [ 6 ] [ 7 ] [ 8 ] Hunter and Beau later encouraged their father to marry again, [ 9 ] and Jill Jacobs Stevenson became their stepmother in 1977. [ 2 ] Biden's half-sister Ashley was born in 1981. [ 10 ] Like his father and brother, Biden attended the Catholic high school Archmere Academy in Claymont, Delaware . [ 2 ] He graduated with a Bachelor of Arts degree in history from Georgetown University in 1992. [ 2 ] During the year after he graduated from college, he served as a Jesuit volunteer at a church in Portland, Oregon , and met Kathleen Buhle , whom he married in 1993. [ 2 ] After attending the Georgetown University Law Center for one year, he transferred to Yale Law School and graduated in 1996. [ 2 ] Early career After graduating from law school in 1996, Biden accepted a consultant position at the bank holding company MBNA , whose employees donated more than $200,000 to his father's senate campaigns over the years. [ 2 ] [ 11 ] [ 12 ] Biden delayed his start date at MBNA to serve as co-chair for his father's reelection campaign. [ 13 ] By 1998, Hunter Biden had risen to the rank of executive vice president. [ 2 ] Biden departed from MBNA in 1998. He then served at the United States Department of Commerce , focusing on ecommerce policy for President Bill Clinton's administration . [ 14 ] In 2001, Biden became a lobbyist, co-founding the firm of Oldaker, Biden & Belair. [ 15 ] According to Adam Entous of The New Yorker , Biden and his father established a relationship in which "[Joe] Biden wouldn't ask Hunter about his lobbying clients, and Hunter wouldn't tell his father about them". [ 2 ] In 2001, he was also rehired by MBNA as a consultant, where he was paid a yearly $100,000 retainer until 2005. [ 13 ] MBNA's rehiring of Biden was controversial because his father was pushing for passage of the Bankruptcy Abuse Prevention and Consumer Protection Act , which was beneficial to the credit card industry and supported by MBNA during Biden's time at the bank. [ 2 ] [ 16 ] The legislation made it more difficult to get bankruptcy protection. [ 16 ] Biden was appointed to a five-year term on the board of directors of Amtrak by President George W. Bush in 2006. [ 17 ] Biden was the board's vice chairman from July 2006 until he was replaced as vice chairman in January 2009. [ 18 ] He resigned from the board that February, [ 19 ] shortly after his father became vice president. Biden said during his father's vice-presidential campaign that it was time for his lobbying activities to end. [ 2 ] Investing, lobbying, and philanthropy In 2006, Biden and his uncle James Biden purchased international hedge fund Paradigm Global Advisors with an $8 million promissory note. [ 15 ] The joint promotion of the fund by an entity of the troubled Stanford Financial Group hastened the unwinding of the company in 2010. [ 20 ] In September 2008, Hunter Biden founded a consultancy company named Seneca Global Advisors that offered to help companies expand into foreign markets. [ 21 ] Biden was a partner in investment vehicles that included the name "Seneca" to denote his participation. [ 22 ] In 2009, Biden, Devon Archer, and Christopher Heinz founded the investment and advisory firm Rosemont Seneca Partners . [ 15 ] Biden also co-founded venture capital firm Eudora Global. [ 10 ] Biden held the position of counsel in the law firm Boies Schiller Flexner LLP in 2014. [ 2 ] From 2011 to 2017, Biden was on the board of directors of World Food Program USA, a 501(c)(3) charity based in Washington, D.C., that supports the work of the UN World Food Programme ; he served as board chairman from 2011 to 2015. [ 23 ] A detailed analysis of Hunter Biden's hard drive by NBC News showed that Biden and his firm were paid $11 million from 2013 to 2018, [ 24 ] including $3.8 million in payments from CEFC China Energy , [ 25 ] a defunct oil and gas company with links to the Chinese Communist Party , [ 26 ] as well as from Burisma Holdings. [ 24 ] In the U.S. criminal tax case against Hunter Biden, prosecutors allege he accepted payments from Romanian businessman Gabriel Popoviciu to influence U.S. government agencies regarding a criminal probe in Romania. Hunter Biden has pleaded guilty on 5 September 2024 to tax evasion and related charges. The allegations date back to his work for Popoviciu in 2015, during Joe Biden's vice presidency. [ 27 ] BHR Partners Main article: BHR Partners From 2013 to 2020, Biden served as a member of the board of the China-based private equity fund BHR Partners , of which he acquired a 10% stake in 2017 at a discount to actual value and with borrowed money. [ 28 ] [ 29 ] The founders of BHR Partners included Biden's Rosemont Seneca Partners investment firm (20% equity), along with US-based Thornton Group LLC (10% equity) and two asset managers registered in China. [ 30 ] [ 2 ] [ 21 ] The Chinese-registered asset managers are the Bank of China (via BOC International Holdings -backed Bohai Industrial Investment Fund Management) and Deutsche Bank -backed Harvest Fund Management . [ 31 ] In September 2019, while President Donald Trump was accusing Hunter Biden of malfeasance in Ukraine, he also falsely claimed that Biden "walk[ed] out of China with $1.5 billion in a fund". [ 32 ] Later in 2019, The Wall Street Journal confirmed that Trump was incorrect in claiming that Hunter received $1.5 billion, stating that Trump had no evidence to support the claim and that he incorrectly interpreted BHR's past fundraising target of $1.5 billion; BHR invested money raised from other companies and did not keep the funds. [ 33 ] Trump publicly called upon China to investigate Hunter Biden's business activities there while his father was vice president. [ 34 ] [ 35 ] Hunter Biden announced his resignation from the board of directors of BHR Partners, effective the end of October 2019, citing "the barrage of false charges" by then-U.S. President Trump. [ 36 ] [ 37 ] This was confirmed by Biden's attorney, who said in November 2021 that his client no longer held any direct or indirect interest in BHR. [ 38 ] However, as of April 2020, Chinese business records showed that Hunter Biden remained a board member of BHR. [ 39 ] According to his lawyer, Biden had "not received any compensation for being on BHR's board of directors" nor had he received any return on his equity share in BHR. [ 40 ] Biden's lawyer George Mesires told The Washington Post that BHR Partners had been "capitalized from various sources with a total of 30 million RMB ( Renminbi ), or about $4.2 million, not $1.5 billion". [ 32 ] Biden's solely-owned company Skaneateles LLC owned a 10% equity stake in BHR as of December 2020. [ 41 ] [ 42 ] In November 2021, New York Times reported that "Chinese corporate records show Skaneateles remains a part owner of BHR". [ 38 ] Skaneateles was dissolved in 2022. BHR Partners invests Chinese venture capital into tech startups, such as an early-stage investment in Chinese auto hailing app DiDi [ 33 ] and cross-border acquisitions in automotive and mining, for example, the purchase of a stake in Democratic Republic of Congo copper and cobalt producer Tenke Fungurume Mining . [ 43 ] [ 44 ] The New York Times reported that BHR Partners helped finance a coal-mining company in Australia that was controlled by a Chinese state-owned enterprise , assisted a subsidiary of a Chinese defense company in acquiring an auto parts manufacturer in Michigan, and facilitated the $3.8 billion purchase of the DRC cobalt mine. A former BHR board member told the Times that Biden and the other American BHR founder, Devon Archer , were not involved in the mine deal. [ 38 ] [ 45 ] [ 46 ] Burisma Holdings See also: Biden–Ukraine conspiracy theory and Trump–Ukraine scandal In April 2014, Biden joined the board of Burisma Holdings owned by Ukrainian oligarch and former politician Mykola Zlochevsky , who was facing a money laundering investigation just after the Ukrainian revolution . [ 47 ] [ 48 ] [ 49 ] Biden's business partner, Devon Archer, had joined the board of Burisma several months prior. Biden was hired to help Burisma with requesting assistance from the U.S government to expand its business and corporate governance best practices , while still an attorney with Boies Schiller Flexner . A consulting firm in which Biden is a partner was also retained by Burisma. [ 50 ] [ 51 ] [ 52 ] [ 53 ] Christopher Heinz, John Kerry 's stepson, opposed his partners Devon Archer and Hunter Biden joining the board in 2014 due to the reputational risk . [ 48 ] Biden served on the board of Burisma until his term expired in April 2019, [ 52 ] receiving compensation of up to $50,000 per month. [ 52 ] [ 51 ] Because Joe Biden played a major role in U.S. policy towards Ukraine, some Ukrainian anti-corruption advocates [ 54 ] [ 55 ] and Obama administration officials expressed concern that Hunter Biden having joined the board could create the appearance of a conflict of interest and undermine Joe Biden's anti-corruption work in Ukraine. [ 2 ] [ 48 ] While serving as vice president, Joe Biden joined other Western leaders in encouraging the government of Ukraine to fire the country's top prosecutor Viktor Shokin , [ 56 ] [ 57 ] who was widely criticized for blocking corruption investigations. [ 58 ] [ 59 ] The Ukrainian parliament voted to remove Shokin in March 2016. [ 60 ] [ 61 ] Biden lobbied the U.S. State Department on behalf of Burisma to help secure a potentially lucrative energy project in Italy while his father was still Vice President. In 2016, Biden wrote a letter to the U.S. ambassador to Italy, John R. Phillips , which Biden's lawyer described as seeking to arrange an introduction between Burisma and the president of Italy's Tuscany region, the location of a potential Burisma energy project. A businessman involved in Burisma's project said that the outreach was undertaken at a time when Burisma was having difficulty securing regulatory approval for its Tuscany project. Embassy officials who handled the letter were concerned about the son of the sitting vice president reaching out on behalf of a foreign company, and Biden's request for a meeting was ultimately unmet. As President, Joe Biden released records confirming Hunter Biden's lobbying effort after dropping out of his 2024 presidential campaign , and denied being aware of it while vice president. [ 50 ] [ 62 ] Since early 2019, Hunter and his father Joe Biden have been the subjects of false and baseless claims of corrupt activities in a Biden–Ukraine conspiracy theory pushed by then-U.S. president Donald Trump and his allies. [ 63 ] Trump and his personal lawyer Rudy Giuliani claimed in 2019, without evidence, that Joe Biden had sought the dismissal of Shokin in order to protect his son and Burisma Holdings. Actually, it was the official policy of the United States and the European Union to seek Shokin's removal. [ 64 ] [ 54 ] [ 56 ] [ 65 ] [ 66 ] There has also been no evidence produced of wrongdoing by Hunter Biden in Ukraine. [ 67 ] [ 68 ] The Ukrainian anti-corruption investigation agency stated in September 2019 that its current investigation of Burisma was restricted solely to investigating the period from 2010 to 2012, before Hunter Biden joined Burisma in 2014. [ 69 ] Shokin, in May 2019, claimed that he was fired because he had been actively investigating Burisma, [ 70 ] but U.S. and Ukrainian officials have stated that the investigation into Burisma was dormant at the time of Shokin's dismissal. [ 48 ] [ 70 ] [ 71 ] Ukrainian and United States State Department sources note that Shokin was fired for failing to address corruption, including within his office. [ 65 ] [ 55 ] [ 72 ] In July 2019, Trump ordered the freezing of $391 million in military aid [ 73 ] shortly before a telephone conversation with Ukrainian president Volodymyr Zelenskyy in which Trump asked Zelenskyy to initiate an investigation of the Bidens. [ 74 ] [ 75 ] Trump falsely told Zelenskyy that "[Joe] Biden went around bragging that he stopped the prosecution" of his son; Joe Biden did not stop any prosecution, did not brag about doing so, and there is no evidence his son was ever under investigation. [ 76 ] The United States House of Representatives initiated a formal impeachment inquiry on September 24, 2019, against Trump on the grounds that he may have sought to use U.S. foreign aid and the Ukrainian government to damage Joe Biden's 2020 presidential campaign . [ 77 ] Ukrainian prosecutor general Yuriy Lutsenko said in May 2019 that Hunter Biden had not violated Ukrainian law. After Lutsenko was replaced by Ruslan Riaboshapka as prosecutor general, Lutsenko and Riaboshapka said in September and October 2019 respectively that they had seen no evidence of wrongdoing by Hunter Biden. [ 56 ] [ 78 ] [ 79 ] During 2019 and 2020, Republican senators Ron Johnson and Chuck Grassley investigated Hunter Biden's involvement with Burisma, as well as allegations that Democrats colluded with the Ukrainian government to interfere in the 2016 election. The chairman of the Senate Intelligence Committee Republican senator Richard Burr privately expressed concerns to the senators that their inquiries could assist efforts by Russian intelligence to spread disinformation to disrupt American domestic affairs. [ 80 ] American intelligence officials briefed senators in late 2019 about Russian efforts to frame Ukraine for 2016 election interference. [ 81 ] Johnson said he would release findings in spring 2020, as Democrats would be selecting their 2020 presidential nominee, but instead ramped up the investigation at Trump's urging in May 2020, after it became clear that Joe Biden would be the nominee. [ 82 ] [ 83 ] Trump tweeted a press report about the investigations, later stating that he would make allegations of corruption by the Bidens a central theme of his re-election campaign. [ 81 ] Johnson decided in March 2020 against issuing a subpoena for former Ukrainian official Andrii Telizhenko, a Giuliani associate who had made appearances on the pro-Trump cable channel One America News , after the FBI briefed him about concerns Telizhenko could be spreading Russian disinformation. [ 84 ] The State Department revoked Telizhenko's visa in October 2020, and CNN reported the American government was considering sanctioning him as a Russian agent. [ 85 ] CNN reported that Vladislav Davidzon, the editor of Ukrainian magazine The Odessa Review , told CNN that in 2018 Telizhenko offered him money to lobby Republican senators in support of pro-Russian television stations in Ukraine. [ 86 ] When Johnson released the final report on the investigation, it contained no evidence that Joe Biden had pushed for Shokin's removal in order to benefit Hunter or Burisma. [ 87 ] [ 88 ] In June 2020, former Ukrainian prosecutor general Ruslan Riaboshapka stated that an audit of thousands of old case files he had ordered in October 2019 had found no wrongdoing by Hunter Biden. Riaboshapka was described by Zelenskyy as "100 percent my person" during the July 2019 call in which Trump asked him to investigate Biden. [ 89 ] Ukrainian lawmaker Andrii Derkach , an associate of Rudy Giuliani with links to Russian intelligence, released in May 2020 alleged snippets of recordings of Joe Biden speaking with Ukrainian president Petro Poroshenko during the years Hunter Biden worked for Burisma. [ 90 ] The recordings, which were not verified as authentic and appeared heavily edited, depicted Biden linking loan guarantees for Ukraine to the ouster of the country's prosecutor general. The recordings did not provide evidence to support the ongoing conspiracy theory that Biden wanted the prosecutor fired to protect his son. [ 91 ] Poroshenko denied in June 2020 that Joe Biden ever approached him about Burisma. [ 92 ] [ 93 ] The United States Department of the Treasury sanctioned Derkach in September 2020, stating he "has been an active Russian agent for over a decade, maintaining close connections with the Russian Intelligence Services". The Treasury Department added Derkach "waged a covert influence campaign centered on cultivating false and unsubstantiated narratives concerning U.S. officials in the upcoming 2020 Presidential Election" including by the release of "edited audio tapes and other unsupported information with the intent to discredit U.S. officials". [ 94 ] [ 95 ] Close associates of Derkach were also sanctioned by the Treasury Department in January 2021. [ 96 ] United States intelligence community analysis released in March 2021 found that Derkach was among proxies of Russian intelligence who promoted and laundered misleading or unsubstantiated narratives about Biden "to US media organizations, US officials, and prominent US individuals, including some close to former President Trump and his administration". [ 97 ] [ 98 ] Two Republicans on a Senate investigation committee in 2020 claimed that Russian businessperson Yelena Baturina , the wife of former Moscow mayor Yury Luzhkov , wire-transferred $3.5 million in 2014 to Rosemont Seneca Thornton, of which Biden had previously been a partner. The Washington Post reported in April 2022 that the partners of Rosemont Seneca Thornton had agreed to dissolve the organization before the 2014 wire transfer, though it continued to be operated by Devin Archer to facilitate real estate transactions for eastern and central Asia investors, while Biden was uninvolved. Archer received the $3.5 million wire from Baturina to purchase property in Brooklyn, New York . [ 22 ] The Senate report cited unspecified confidential documents and gave no evidence that Biden personally accepted the funds. [ 99 ] Biden's attorney denied the report, saying Biden had no financial relationship with Baturina and no stake in the partnership that received the money, nor did he co-found the partnership. [ 100 ] [ 101 ] However, Trump's White House spokeswoman Alyssa Farah repeated the claim, and in a press conference Trump repeatedly asserted that Biden received millions of dollars from the former mayor's wife. [ 99 ] Investigations and federal indictments Main article: Weiss special counsel investigation In December 2020, Biden made a public announcement via his attorney that his tax affairs were under federal criminal investigation. [ 102 ] [ 103 ] The New York Times and CNN described the investigation as having started in late 2018 and being related to potential violations of tax and money laundering laws and Biden's business dealings in foreign countries, principally China. [ 102 ] [ 103 ] The Wall Street Journal reported that Biden had provided legal and consulting services that generated foreign-earned income, citing a Senate Republicans' report that $4.79 million in wire transfers from entities linked to Chinese energy tycoon Ye Jianming and his company, CEFC China Energy , were paying for such services. [ 104 ] The New York Times reported that FBI investigators had been unable to establish sufficient evidence for a prosecution of potential money laundering crimes, including after the seizure of a laptop belonging to Biden, and so the investigation progressed onto tax issues. [ 105 ] [ 106 ] Since October 2021, Hollywood attorney and writer Kevin Morris , who has become an influential adviser/confidant and now financier to Biden, lent Biden more than $6.5 million to pay back taxes, support his family, and fund legal expenses. [ 107 ] [ 108 ] The New York Times reported in March 2022 that, since 2018, Biden and possibly others had been under investigation by federal prosecutors in Delaware, with a grand jury convened to subpoena and hear evidence. The investigation examined payments and gifts Biden or his associates had received from foreign interests and whether Biden had violated the law by not registering as a lobbyist under the Foreign Agents Registration Act (FARA). The Times reported it had acquired emails that were authenticated by people familiar with them and the investigation that appeared to come from a laptop belonging to Biden. One April 2014 email, written by Biden to his business partner as their work with Burisma was about to begin, noted that his father, then the vice president who would soon visit Kyiv , should "be characterized as part of our advice and thinking—but what he will say and do is out of our hands". The email also stated that Burisma officials "need to know in no uncertain terms that we will not and cannot intervene directly with domestic policymakers, and that we need to abide by FARA and any other U.S. laws in the strictest sense across the board". Biden wrote that his father's visit "could be a really good thing or it could end up creating too great an expectation. We need to temper expectations regarding that visit." He also wrote that his employer, the law firm Boies Schiller Flexner, could help Burisma through "direct discussions at state , energy and NSC [ United States National Security Council ]". Other emails showed Biden and his business partner discussing inviting foreign business associates, including a Burisma executive, to attend an April 2015 dinner in Washington, where the vice president would stop by. [ 109 ] A July 2022 report from CNN authenticated emails which showed that Biden was struggling with large debt and overdue tax bills. [ 110 ] [ 111 ] In October 2022, The Washington Post reported that federal agents had determined months prior that they had assembled enough evidence for a viable criminal case against Biden to charge him with crimes related to making false declarations during a gun purchase, as well as tax-related crimes. The next step was for Delaware U.S. attorney David C. Weiss , a holdover from the Trump administration, [ 112 ] to decide on whether to file such charges. [ 113 ] Federal investigators had also been examining the lobbying firm Blue Star Strategies, which Burisma retained while Biden sat on its board, for possible illegal lobbying of American officials. There was no indication Biden was a subject of the investigation. Blue Star employees said in Senate testimony that Biden was included in emails about the firm's work but that he was not particularly involved. One of the firm's co-founders said Biden did not direct its work. Blue Star's work came after Burisma's owner was criticized by the United States State Department, and the firm's founders testified the firm had merely approached officials to determine the government's views of Burisma. [ 114 ] [ 115 ] On June 20, 2023, in a deal with prosecutors, Biden agreed to plead guilty to two misdemeanor tax charges of failure to pay income tax, and to enter a pretrial diversion program related to a felony gun charge of unlawful possession of a firearm. [ 116 ] [ 117 ] [ 118 ] Prosecutors recommended two years of probation for the tax charges; the gun charge would be dropped at the end of this period if the conditions of the diversion program had been met successfully. [ 112 ] Having the gun charge dropped was conditional on Biden remaining drug-free and never being allowed to own a firearm again. [ 119 ] Biden's attorney said the agreement with prosecutors "resolved" the investigation, though the Justice Department said the investigation was "ongoing". In court on July 26, 2023, federal prosecutors explained that the "ongoing" aspect of the investigation referred to possible charges under the Foreign Agents Registration Act (FARA); FARA requires that anyone who acts on the behalf of a foreign government, e.g. China or Ukraine, must register with the Department of Justice and file regular reports on their activities for that government. [ 120 ] On July 26, the plea deal was rejected by the presiding judge, who cited concerns over immunity Biden might receive from future charges, and gave 30 days to both the government prosecutors and Biden's defense team to provide additional information. [ 119 ] Biden changed his plea from "guilty" to "not guilty". [ 121 ] [ 122 ] On August 8, Weiss requested appointment as a special counsel in the Biden investigation, which attorney general Merrick Garland granted. Garland announced the appointment on August 11, the same day Weiss announced government and Biden attorneys could not reach agreement on a new plea deal. [ 123 ] [ 124 ] The Justice Department said on September 6 that Weiss would ask a grand jury to return an indictment of Biden on a gun charge by September 29. [ 125 ] On September 14, Biden was officially indicted in Delaware on three federal firearms-related charges: two for making false statements on a firearm application form and one for prohibited possession of a firearm. [ 126 ] He was arraigned on October 3 and pleaded not guilty to all charges. [ 127 ] Legal experts noted that prosecutions for these charges are rare. [ 128 ] [ 129 ] In January 2024, prosecutors urged a judge to not dismiss Biden's gun charge, revealing that cocaine residue was found in his gun pouch. [ 130 ] On December 7, 2023, Biden was indicted in California on nine tax charges, including three felony and six misdemeanor offenses. The indictment reads that "The Defendant engaged in a four-year scheme to not pay at least $1.4 million in self-assessed federal taxes he owed for tax years 2016 through 2019." Biden's lawyer said that Biden had repaid his taxes in full prior to the indictment. [ 131 ] [ 132 ] On January 11, 2024, Biden pleaded not guilty to the tax charges. [ 133 ] [ 134 ] The same day, U.S. District Judge Mark Scarsi scheduled the trial for June 20, 2024. [ 135 ] [ 134 ] The trial was later delayed to September 5, 2024, due to the "needs of the defendant" in preparing for his Delaware trial on firearms charges in June. [ 136 ] Biden repeatedly sought to dismiss both tax and gun charges against him, without success. [ 137 ] [ 138 ] In August 2024, prosecutors alleged that Biden agreed to lobby on behalf of a Romanian businessman seeking to "influence U.S. government agencies" while his father was vice president. The businessman, Gabriel Popoviciu, was under criminal investigation in Romania at the time and hired Biden to assist in fighting his criminal charges through the US government. Prosecutors sought to introduce evidence from Biden's work with Popoviciu as part of his charges on tax evasion. [ 139 ] [ 140 ] A pre-trial hearing for the tax indictment which involved Biden's lawyers would be held on August 21, 2024. [ 141 ] Firearms trial and convictions A final pre-trial hearing for the gun charges was held on May 24, 2024. [ 142 ] [ 143 ] [ 144 ] During the final hearing, Judge Maryellen Noreika ruled that prosecutors could not refer to his upcoming California tax trial, child support proceedings in Arkansas, his discharge from the Navy, or include statements which Biden made at a July 2023 hearing where his plea deal collapsed. [ 143 ] However, the prosecution was permitted to bring up Biden's drug use, portions of his memoir, and a summary of data from his laptop, phone, and iPad . [ 143 ] [ 145 ] Biden's trial began on June 3, 2024, on charges of unlawfully possessing a gun as a drug user, lying on a federal form when he bought the gun, and making a false statement about information required to be collected by a federally licensed gun dealer. The charges stemmed from a gun purchased and possessed by Biden in October 2018. During the trial, three of Biden's former partners testified regarding Biden's drug usage and gun purchase. [ 145 ] On June 11, Biden was found guilty on three felony charges for federal gun violations. [ 146 ] [ 147 ] The conviction made Biden the first child of a sitting U.S. president to be convicted in a criminal trial. [ 148 ] Due to his conviction on felony charges, Biden's license to practice law in Washington, D.C. was suspended. [ 149 ] Biden was scheduled to be sentenced on December 12, 2024, which did not occur due to him being pardoned by his father on December 1. [ 150 ] Tax indictment and guilty pleas On September 5, 2024, Biden's defense lawyer Abbe Lowell revealed that Biden would change his plea from not guilty to guilty in the federal tax case. [ 151 ] Biden had been indicted with three felony charges– one tax evasion count and two counts of filing false returns – and six misdemeanor charges. [ 152 ] It was not immediately clear if the presiding Judge Mark C. Scarsi would accept this plea proposal, which would be regarded as an Alford plea . [ 153 ] Under this proposed plea agreement, Biden would have accepted both a sentence and the strength of evidence against him, but also maintained his innocence. [ 154 ] [ 153 ] Later in the day, it was reported that this plea offer would not be accepted by the prosecution. [ 155 ] Initially, Judge Scarsi would neither accept the initial plea offer or call off the trial, but also did not make a final ruling and would opt to make a decision about the plea offer at a later time. [ 154 ] [ 156 ] Prosecutors said they would reject an Alford plea. [ 157 ] However, Scarsi would accept a guilty plea by the end of the day, with Biden pleading guilty to all nine charges. [ 158 ] During his plea hearing, Biden responded "Yes" after Scarsi asked him "Do you agree you committed every element of the charges in the indictment?" [ 158 ] Biden was scheduled to be sentenced on December 16, 2024 and he could have faced up to 17 years in prison. Former federal prosecutor, Tom Dupree, told CBS News he expected the judge to impose a sentence of fewer than five years. President Biden, White House press secretary Karine Jean-Pierre, First Lady Jill Biden, and White House spokesperson Andrew Bates repeatedly stated that the president would decline to pardon Hunter or commute his sentence. [ 158 ] [ 150 ] Pardon of criminal offenses Pardon dated December 1, 2024 On December 1, 2024, President Biden issued a full and unconditional pardon for his son. The pardon covered all federal offenses committed between January 1, 2014, and December 1, 2024, and included his tax charges, gun charges, and any other potential charges within that time. In an official White House statement from President Biden, he said that he believed his son was "selectively, and unfairly, prosecuted", and blamed political pressure for the failure of a plea deal for Hunter. [ 159 ] [ 160 ] He concluded by saying "I hope Americans will understand why a father and a President would come to this decision." The New York Times reported that the plea deal fell apart due to the presiding judge questioning its unusual construction, which violated a basic tenet of federal guilty pleas against having side deals in the plea agreement. [ 161 ] In court filings subsequent to the pardon, special counsel Weiss stated "there was none and never has been any evidence of vindictive or selective prosecution in this case". [ 162 ] Judge Scarsi stated that President Biden's characterizations "stand in tension with the case record" and that the Constitution does not "give the president the authority to rewrite history[.]" [ 163 ] The scope of the pardon was unusually broad and legal experts could recall only Richard Nixon as someone given similar terms for a pardon , for a term between 1969 and 1974. [ 164 ] [ 165 ] [ 150 ] The breadth of the pardon includes Hunter Biden's "entire tenure on the board of the Ukrainian gas company Burisma, as well as much of his other international work, including in China." [ 166 ] The pardon received bipartisan criticism from members of Congress as harming the justice system. [ 167 ] [ 168 ] In the months leading up to Hunter's scheduled sentencing, the President had made repeated statements that he would not use the pardon authority for his own son. He and his staff continued to state that there would be no pardon for Hunter as late as November, although internal staff discussions affirmed that the option for a pardon would remain on the table even as Biden publicly stated otherwise. [ 169 ] [ 150 ] Hunter issued the following statement in response to the pardon: I have admitted and taken responsibility for my mistakes during the darkest days of my addiction – mistakes that have been exploited to publicly humiliate and shame me and my family for political sport, I will never take the clemency I have been given today for granted and will devote the life I have rebuilt to helping those who are still sick and suffering. [ 170 ] Laptop files Main article: Hunter Biden laptop controversy Hunter with his sister Ashley , at their father's inauguration, January 2021. Discovery of Hunter Biden's laptop was an October surprise prior to the 2020 election. [ 171 ] On October 14, 2020, twenty days prior to the 2020 United States presidential election , the New York Post published an article based on content provided to the publication by Donald Trump 's personal attorney Rudy Giuliani and former chief strategist Steve Bannon . The article concerned what the Post said was a laptop computer that had belonged to Hunter Biden and that was allegedly left for repairs at a Wilmington, Delaware , computer shop. According to the narrative in the Post article, this device contained an email that referenced a "meeting" between Joe Biden and Vadym Pozharskyi, a Burisma advisor. [ 172 ] The article's veracity was strongly questioned at the time by many mainstream media outlets as well as dozens of current and former intelligence officials for possibly being a Russian disinformation campaign. [ 173 ] [ 174 ] (As of March 25, 2022, Vox reported that there was no evidence to corroborate the intelligence officials' suspicions that the laptop leak was part of a "Russian plot". [ 171 ] ) In January 2024, federal prosecutors stated that they had possession of a laptop computer which Hunter Biden left at the computer store and confirmed that the device contained files also found in cloud backups to Biden's Apple account. [ 175 ] In June 2024, the laptop and its contents were utilized as evidence during a federal court trial of Hunter Biden for firearms charges. FBI investigators testified at the trial, confirming the authenticity of the laptop, and stating that they had cross-referencing texts, emails, and messages found on the laptop with Apple and had verified the serial number on the laptop. Prosecutors also introduced the invoice from the repair shop as evidence. [ 176 ] [ 177 ] Biden was deposed by the House Judiciary and Oversight committees on February 28, 2024, which discussed emails found on the laptop. Biden stated during the deposition that he did not recall sending the laptop for repairs. [ 178 ] [ 179 ] In February 2023, Hunter Biden's attorneys wrote to the Justice Department National Security Division asking that they criminally investigate "individuals for whom there is considerable reason to believe violated various federal laws in accessing, copying, manipulating, and/or disseminating Mr. Biden's personal computer data". A similar letter was sent to the Attorney General of Delaware . The letters named Giuliani, Bannon, Mac Isaac (owner of the Wilmington computer repair shop where the laptop was abandoned), and others. [ 180 ] [ 181 ] The special counsel assigned to the case later described Hunter Biden's claim of right-wing bias as "fiction designed for a Hollywood script". [ 175 ] Another event resulting from discovery of the laptop occurred in January 2023: an anonymous Twitter account posted a rental application found on the laptop, leading to a false claim that in 2018 Hunter Biden had paid rent while residing at his father's Delaware home, where classified documents had been found . James Comer , chair of the House Oversight Committee that was investigating the Biden family , inquired whether it was evidence that Hunter Biden illicitly provided money from his foreign business activities to his father. The document was determined to be a quarterly rental payment for office space at the House of Sweden in Washington, D.C. [ 182 ] Navy Reserve Biden's application for a position in the U.S. Navy Reserve was approved in May 2013. [ 183 ] At age 43, Biden was accepted as part of a program that allows a limited number of applicants with desirable skills to receive commissions and serve in staff positions. [ 184 ] Biden received an age-related waiver and a waiver for a past drug-related incident; he was sworn in as a direct commission officer by his father in a White House ceremony. [ 183 ] [ 2 ] Results of a routine urinalysis taken on Biden's first weekend of reserve duty revealed cocaine in his system. [ 2 ] [ 184 ] He was discharged administratively in February 2014. [ 184 ] [ 185 ] Biden attributed the result to having smoked a cigarette that he had asked a group of men outside a store to give him, claiming the cigarette contained cocaine as well as tobacco. [ 2 ] He did not appeal the discharge, stating that he thought it unlikely the panel would believe his explanation given his history of drug addiction. [ 186 ] [ 2 ] Biden also stated that he did not appeal due to the likelihood that this would result in the press becoming aware of the discharge; however, it was eventually disclosed to The Wall Street Journal by a Navy official. [ 2 ] [ 183 ] Work as an artist In February 2020, The New York Times reported that Biden had been painting as an "undiscovered artist" in his Hollywood Hills home. The report also displayed some of his paintings, including "Untitled #4 (a study in ink)" and "Untitled #3 (a signed work)". [ 187 ] Biden's art dealer, Georges Bergès, hosted a private viewing for Biden in Los Angeles in fall 2021, followed by an exhibition in New York. [ 188 ] Biden's paintings were put up for sale for as much as $500,000 per painting, with Kevin Morris purchasing $875,000 worth of his art. [ 189 ] Another buyer was Elizabeth Hirsh Naftali, a prominent California Democratic Party donor who was appointed to the U.S. Commission for the Preservation of America's Heritage Abroad by Joe Biden. Business Insider was unable to verify how much Hirsh Naftali spent on the art, nor whether the purchase occurred before or after her appointment. An ethicist interviewed by the news website said that the purchase was ethically problematic, particularly if it occurred before her appointment, as "it might be perceived as a quid pro quo ." [ 190 ] The purchases provoked concerns about possible conflicts of interest and a lack of transparency. [ 191 ] [ 192 ] According to court filings by Biden, between December 2021 and December 2023, he sold approximately $1.5 million of his art. [ 193 ] From December 2023 to March 2025, he sold $36,000 of art. [ 193 ] Presidency of Joe Biden During his father's presidency, Hunter emerged as one of six key individuals who insulated Joe from scrutiny and acted as an intermediary between him and others. [ 194 ] After a poor presidential debate performance by Joe in June 2024 caused intensified public concern about his age and fitness for the presidency, Hunter helped Joe with speech preparation and began joining meetings with the president and his staffers. [ 195 ] Hunter maintained daily, often hourly contact with his father on calls. Joe increasingly relied on Hunter for advice, and Hunter emerged as one of the strongest voices in Joe's circle urging him not to drop out of his reelection campaign . [ 196 ] [ 197 ] [ 198 ] [ 199 ] Hunter had been a regular presence in public White House events, but his increased involvement in Biden's presidency and campaign led to surprise and concern from White House staffers. After Joe's poor debate performance, Hunter advocated for Joe to fire some of his top staffers, including Anita Dunn and Bob Bauer . Hunter also began acting as a "de facto gatekeeper" for access to the president. [ 197 ] [ 199 ] [ 200 ] Litigation Between 2023 and 2024, Hunter privately sued numerous individuals, organizations, and the U.S. Government alleging various instances of invasion of privacy and defamation. In September 2023, Biden filed suit against the IRS , claiming unlawful disclosures of his tax return information in relation to two IRS employees who provided information to members of Congress. [ 201 ] The D.C. District Court dismissed his claim under the Privacy Act in September 2024, and Biden dropped the suit altogether in 2025. [ 202 ] In 2023, Biden sued Garrett Ziegler 's Marco Polo organization, accusing the group of invasion of privacy for publishing 128,000 of his emails that were recovered from his lost laptop computer. [ 203 ] In March 2025, Biden sought to have the case dismissed due to his worsening personal financial situation and inability to continue to pay for his own legal representation. [ 203 ] In 2024, Biden sued Rudy Giuliani alleging Giuliani was responsible for the "total annihilation" of his privacy due to his involvement in releasing data from his laptop computer. [ 204 ] He dropped the lawsuit shortly thereafter. [ 204 ] The same year, he sued Fox News for airing images taken from the laptop, but dropped the lawsuit without explanation the following month. [ 205 ] Three months later, however, he resurrected the lawsuit in state court. [ 206 ] In a statement, Fox News described the second lawsuit as "devoid of any merit". [ 206 ] Later life Following the presidency of Joe Biden, according to The Daily Beast , Hunter fell "on hard times". [ 207 ] The prior year — in 2024 — his law license had been suspended, NBC News noting at the time that it was unclear what impact the suspension would have on his livelihood. [ 208 ] In January 2025, his rental home was damaged and left uninhabitable during the Palisades Fire and he had difficulty finding new housing, resulting in him experiencing homelessness. By this point, he was several million dollars in debt and his income severely impacted by flagging interest in his memoir, which was selling less than 200 copies per month. In court filings, Biden averred that he had anticipated earning money from invitations for paid speaking engagements, but no such invitations had materialized. [ 207 ] [ 209 ] In March 2025, Hunter's Secret Service detail was withdrawn on the direction of Donald Trump. Prior to the end of his term, Joe Biden had ordered an extended period of post-presidency protection for Hunter. [ 210 ] Personal life Relationships Biden (center) with family at his brother Beau's funeral in June 2015 In 1993, Biden married Kathleen Buhle . [ 2 ] They have three daughters: Naomi (named after Biden's sister), [ 211 ] Finnegan, and Maisey. [ 10 ] The couple formally separated in October 2015, and divorced in 2017. [ 212 ] [ 213 ] Buhle's 2022 memoir If We Break documents her account of the relationship. [ 214 ] Biden began a relationship with his brother's widow Hallie Olivere Biden in 2016. [ 215 ] [ 2 ] The relationship ended in 2019. [ 2 ] [ 216 ] [ 217 ] Between 2017 and 2018, Biden also had a romantic relationship with Zoë Kestan . [ 217 ] Biden has a fourth daughter, born in August 2018 in Arkansas , to Lunden Alexis Roberts. [ 218 ] [ 219 ] Biden initially denied that the child was his, but a DNA test , conducted as part of a paternity suit filed in May 2019 by Roberts, confirmed he is the father. The lawsuit was settled in March 2020 after Biden agreed to pay Roberts $20,000 a month in child support. [ 220 ] [ 221 ] Biden filed a motion in September 2022 to reduce his child support payments, on the basis of reduced income; Roberts opposed this request and also petitioned the Arkansas court to change the child's surname to Biden, so that his daughter might benefit from associations with Biden's family. [ 222 ] In June 2023, Biden and Roberts settled the dispute. As part of the settlement, Biden agreed to give several of his paintings to his daughter and pay an undisclosed monthly amount in child support until the daughter turns 18. Biden also agreed to assist with college tuition. Roberts agreed to drop her petition to change their daughter's surname. [ 223 ] [ 224 ] [ 225 ] The matter received significant attention in the media. [ 226 ] Biden married South African filmmaker Melissa Cohen in May 2019, within a week of first meeting her. [ 186 ] [ 227 ] Their son, named Beau in honor of Biden's brother, was born in March 2020 in Los Angeles. [ 228 ] [ 229 ] Drug and alcohol abuse Biden has abused drugs and alcohol throughout his adult life, which he has detailed in his 2021 memoir. [ 230 ] [ 231 ] He believes his addiction issues are linked to episodes of family loss he suffered, [ 232 ] beginning with the 1972 motor vehicle accident that killed his mother and sister. [ 233 ] Biden said that his family never talked much with him about the accident, and this allowed the emotional trauma he felt to remain unresolved; it worsened following the death of his brother, Beau. [ 232 ] Over the past two decades, Biden has been in multiple substance abuse rehabilitation programs , each followed by an interval of sobriety followed by relapse. At his worst, Biden stated that he was "smoking crack every 15 minutes". [ 234 ] The $11 million Biden and his firm were paid from 2013 to 2018 fueled his addiction. In his memoir, he wrote that the money "turned into a major enabler during my steepest skid into addiction" and "hounded me to spend recklessly, dangerously, destructively. Humiliatingly. So I did." [ 24 ] He had an intervention in early 2019. [ 235 ] Memoir Biden released Beautiful Things , a memoir of the trauma of the accident that claimed his mother and sister, and his later addiction struggles, on April 6, 2021. [ 236 ] The New York Times described the book as "equal parts family saga, grief narrative and addict's howl". [ 237 ] References ^ Phelps, Jordyn; Saenz, Arlette (August 25, 2015). "Hunter Biden Denies Ashley Madison Account Is His" . ABC News . Archived from the original on August 4, 2019 . Retrieved October 6, 2019 . ^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o p q r s t u v Entous, Adam (July 1, 2019). "Will Hunter Biden Jeopardize His Father's Campaign?" . The New Yorker . Archived from the original on July 10, 2019 . Retrieved October 6, 2019 . ^ Connelly, Kevin (August 28, 2008). "Biden shows more bark than bite" . BBC News . London, England. Archived from the original on October 23, 2014 . Retrieved May 7, 2014 . ^ Broder, John M. (August 28, 2008). "Biden Opens New Phase With Attack on McCain" . The New York Times . Archived from the original on October 27, 2014 . Retrieved May 17, 2020 . ^ Swinney, Anand Veeravagu (June 2015). "The Brain Tumor That Killed Beau Biden" . The Daily Beast . Archived from the original on June 12, 2022 . Retrieved June 12, 2022 . ^ Kruse, Michael (January 25, 2019). "How Grief Became Joe Biden's 'Superpower' " . Politico . Archived from the original on June 13, 2020 . Retrieved July 10, 2021 . ^ Benac, Nancy (August 18, 2019). "Biden's prism of loss: A public man, shaped by private grief" . Associated Press . Archived from the original on February 14, 2021 . Retrieved July 10, 2021 . ^ Thrush, Glenn (December 29, 2015). "Remembering Beau Biden" . Politico . Archived from the original on February 12, 2021 . Retrieved July 10, 2021 . ^ Seelye, Katharine Q. (August 24, 2008). "Jill Biden Heads Toward Life in the Spotlight" . The New York Times . Archived from the original on December 10, 2008 . Retrieved May 17, 2020 . ^ a b c Newman, Meredith; Jagtiani, Sarika; Sharp, Andrew (September 26, 2019). "Hunter Biden: Who is former Vice President Joe Biden's son mentioned in Ukraine-Trump call?" . USA Today . Archived from the original on October 5, 2019 . Retrieved October 6, 2019 . ^ Yglesias, Matthew (October 1, 2019). "Hunter Biden, the black sheep who might accidentally bring down Trump, explained" . Vox . Archived from the original on October 23, 2019 . Retrieved October 24, 2019 . There's no reason to think that Biden backed MBNA's position because his son worked there—senators normally line up with their home state's major employers' policy priorities—it's more like Hunter got the job due to his dad's overall cozy relationship with the company. ^ "Biden's Link To Credit-Card Firm Questioned" . National Public Radio (NPR) . August 25, 2008. ^ a b Craven, Jasper (January 26, 2024). "Hunter Biden Snagged a Cushy Bank Job After Law School. He's Been Trading on His Name Ever Since" . Politico . Archived from the original on January 29, 2024 . Retrieved January 29, 2024 . ^ Peligri, Justin (October 18, 2014). "Who is Hunter Biden?" . CNN . Archived from the original on July 28, 2019 . Retrieved October 6, 2019 . ^ a b c Schreckinger, Ben (August 2, 2019). "Biden, Inc.: How 'Middle Class' Joe's family cashed in on the family name" . Politico Magazine . Archived from the original on October 8, 2019 . Retrieved December 11, 2020 . ^ a b Yost, Pete (August 25, 2008). "MBNA paid Biden son at critical time for bill" . Associated Press. Archived from the original on September 14, 2008 . Retrieved April 24, 2024 . ^ Glass, Andrew (February 7, 2007). "A Younger Biden Goes the Extra Miles for Amtrak" . Politico . Washington, D.C. Archived from the original on November 16, 2019 . Retrieved November 16, 2019 . ^ "Amtrak Board Names Thomas Carper of Illinois as Chairman: Former Chairman Donna McLean Becomes Vice Chairman" (PDF) . pennfedbmwe.org . Washington, D.C.: National Railroad Passenger Corporation. January 30, 2009. p. 1. Archived (PDF) from the original on December 20, 2019 . Retrieved November 15, 2019 . ^ Seitz, Amanda (October 21, 2019). "Hunter Biden didn't make millions off Amtrak" . Associated Press . Archived from the original on November 16, 2019 . Retrieved November 16, 2019 . ^ Kamalakaran, Ajay; Daga, Anshuman (February 24, 2009). "Stanford had links to fund run by Bidens: report" . Reuters . Retrieved January 5, 2024 . ^ a b Yu, Sun; Williams, Aime; Olearchyk, Roman (October 9, 2019). "Hunter Biden's web of interests" . Financial Times . Archived from the original on October 30, 2020 . Retrieved October 29, 2020 . ^ a b Kessler, Glenn (April 8, 2022). "Unraveling the tale of Hunter Biden and $3.5 million from Russia" . The Washington Post . Archived from the original on April 8, 2022 . Retrieved April 8, 2022 . ^ Funke, Daniel. "Fact-checking claims about charities linked to Hunter Biden and the Trump children" . PolitiFact . Archived from the original on October 22, 2020 . Retrieved October 23, 2020 . ^ a b c Winter, Tom; Fitzpatrick, Sarah; Atkins, Chloe; Strickler, Laura (May 19, 2022). "Analysis of Hunter Biden's hard drive shows he, his firm took in about $11 million from 2013 to 2018, spent it fast" . NBC News . Archived from the original on May 19, 2022 . Retrieved May 19, 2022 . ^ Chen, Aizhu; Lopatka, Jan (January 13, 2017). "China's CEFC has big ambitions, but little known about ownership, funding" . Reuters . Prague. Archived from the original on October 16, 2023 . Retrieved January 23, 2024 . ^ Viser, Matt (March 30, 2022). "Inside Hunter Biden's multimillion-dollar deals with a Chinese energy company" . The Washington Post . Archived from the original on April 5, 2022 . Retrieved May 26, 2022 . ^ Stempel, Jonathan (August 8, 2024). "US prosecutors says Romanian businessman hired Hunter Biden to seek US policy influence" . Reuters . Retrieved August 8, 2024 . ^ "Hunter Biden: What was he doing in Ukraine and China?" . BBC News. October 23, 2020. Archived from the original on October 29, 2020 . Retrieved October 29, 2020 . ^ Areddy, James T.; Duehren, Andrew (December 23, 2020). "Hunter Biden's Family Name Aided Deals With Foreign Tycoons" . The Wall Street Journal . Archived from the original on January 26, 2021 . Retrieved January 29, 2021 . The dealings got the younger Mr. Biden a discounted stake in a private-equity firm in China... the cost for Mr. Biden's 10% stake, at $420,000, was based on BHR's startup value in 2013, filings show. Of that, at least a third was provided in the form of loans from other BHR principals, according to people familiar with the situation. ^ "About Us: Investment Funds" . BHR Partners. Archived from the original on May 16, 2020 . Retrieved February 5, 2021 . ^ Deng, Chao (July 10, 2014). "Bohai, Harvest and U.S. Investment Firms Expand Target for Outbound Fund" . The Wall Street Journal . Archived from the original on May 17, 2020 . Retrieved May 17, 2020 . ^ a b Kessler, Glenn (September 26, 2019). "Trump's false claims about Hunter Biden's China dealings" . The Washington Post . Archived from the original on October 5, 2019 . Retrieved October 6, 2019 . ^ a b Arredy, James T. (October 4, 2019). "What We Know About Hunter Biden's Dealings in China" . The Wall Street Journal . Dow Jones. Archived from the original on January 14, 2024 . Retrieved January 24, 2024 . ^ Layne, Nathan; Ruwitch, John; Shen, Samuel; Tham, Engen; Zhai, Keith (October 4, 2019). "Explainer: Trump's claims and Hunter Biden's dealings in China" . Reuters. Archived from the original on October 6, 2019 . Retrieved October 6, 2019 . ^ LaFraniere, Sharon ; Forsythe, Michael (October 3, 2019). "What We Know About Hunter Biden's Business in China" . The New York Times . Archived from the original on October 6, 2019 . Retrieved May 17, 2020 . ^ Cohen, David (October 13, 2019). "Hunter Biden to step down from board of Chinese company" . Politico . Archived from the original on October 13, 2019 . Retrieved October 13, 2019 . ^ Newburger, Emma (October 13, 2019). "Hunter Biden resigns from Chinese firm following Trump attacks" . CNBC. Archived from the original on October 13, 2019 . Retrieved October 13, 2019 . ^ a b c Forsythe, Michael; Lipton, Eric; Searcey, Dionne (November 20, 2021). "How Hunter Biden's Firm Helped Secure Cobalt for the Chinese" . The New York Times . Archived from the original on November 20, 2021 . Retrieved January 24, 2024 . ^ Hoonhout, Tobias (April 15, 2020). "Hunter Biden Still Listed on Board of Chinese Firm Six Months after Lawyer Said He Resigned" . Yahoo News . Archived from the original on January 24, 2024 . Retrieved January 24, 2024 . Business records show that Hunter Biden is still listed as a board member of Chinese private equity firm BHR Partners, despite his lawyer saying in November that Biden had resigned from the position. Biden remains on the board and still has a 10 percent equity stake in BHR, which manages $2.1 billion in assets ^ Mesires, George (October 13, 2019). "A Statement on behalf of Hunter Biden, dated October 13, 2019" . Medium . Archived from the original on October 13, 2019 . Retrieved October 13, 2019 . ^ "Biz entity 2896405" . Washington D.C. Corporation Registry . [ permanent dead link ] ^ Areddy, James T.; Duehren, Andrew (December 22, 2020). "Hunter Biden's Family Name Aided Deals With Foreign Tycoons" . Wall Street Journal . Dow Jones. Archived from the original on January 26, 2021 . Retrieved January 24, 2024 . starting in August 2017, entities linked to CEFC's Mr. Ye executed the wire transfers listed as covering legal and advisory costs totaling $4.79 million to Mr. Biden's Washington law firm, Owasco PC... Mr. Biden's October 2019 statement, issued through his lawyer, Mr. Mesires, stopped short of promising he would divest foreign holdings. Corporate records in China suggest he hasn't. A Delaware-registered corporation, Skaneateles LLC, controlled by Mr. Biden, still owns 10% of the Chinese private-equity firm BHR, the records show ^ "Funds" . BHR Partners . Archived from the original on September 29, 2018 . Retrieved November 16, 2016 . ^ McKinnon, Judy (November 15, 2016). "Lundin Mining to Sell Stake in African Mine for $1.14 Billion" . The Wall Street Journal . Archived from the original on November 8, 2020 . Retrieved May 17, 2020 . ^ Aitken, Peter (November 20, 2021). "Hunter Biden's firm helped Chinese company purchase rich cobalt mine in $3.8 billion deal: report" . Fox News . Archived from the original on November 27, 2021 . Retrieved November 27, 2021 . ^ Millward, David (November 21, 2021). "Hunter Biden linked investment firm 'helped' Chinese buy cobalt mine" . The Telegraph . Archived from the original on January 11, 2022. ^ Bullough, Oliver (April 12, 2017). "The money machine: how a high-profile corruption investigation fell apart" . The Guardian . Archived from the original on October 4, 2019 . Retrieved October 6, 2019 . ^ a b c d Sonne, Paul; Kranish, Michael; Viser, Matt (September 28, 2019). "The gas tycoon and the vice president's son: The story of Hunter Biden's foray into Ukraine" . The Washington Post . Archived from the original on October 6, 2019 . Retrieved October 6, 2019 . ^ Risen, James (December 8, 2015). "Joe Biden, His Son and the Case Against a Ukrainian Oligarch" . The New York Times . Archived from the original on October 5, 2019 . Retrieved May 17, 2020 . ^ a b "Hunter Biden Sought State Department Help for Ukrainian Company" . The New York Times . August 13, 2024. ^ a b Vogel, Kenneth P. (September 22, 2019). "Trump, Biden and Ukraine: Sorting Out the Accusations" . The New York Times . Archived from the original on October 6, 2019 . Retrieved May 17, 2020 . ^ a b c Vogel, Kenneth P. ; Mendel, Iuliia (May 1, 2019). "Biden Faces Conflict of Interest Questions That Are Being Promoted by Trump and Allies" . The New York Times . ISSN 0362-4331 . Archived from the original on May 4, 2019 . Retrieved May 17, 2020 . ^ Jacobson, Louis; Kruzel, John (September 23, 2019). "Trump's Ukraine call, a whistleblower and the Bidens: What we know, what we don't" . PolitiFact . Archived from the original on September 24, 2019 . Retrieved September 24, 2019 . ^ a b Braun, Stephen; Berry, Lynn (September 23, 2019). "The story behind Biden's son, Ukraine and Trump's claims" . Associated Press . Archived from the original on October 4, 2019 . Retrieved October 6, 2019 . ^ a b Cullison, Alan (September 22, 2019). "Biden's Anticorruption Effort in Ukraine Overlapped With Son's Work in Country" . The Wall Street Journal . Archived from the original on October 13, 2019 . Retrieved May 17, 2020 . Messrs. Trump and Giuliani have suggested that Joe Biden pushed for the firing of Ukraine's general prosecutor, Viktor Shokin, in March 2016 to stop an investigation into Burisma. In Ukraine, government officials and anticorruption advocates say that is a misrepresentation ... Mr. Shokin had dragged his feet into those investigations, Western diplomats said, and effectively squashed one in London by failing to cooperate with U.K. authorities ... In a speech in 2015, the U.S. ambassador to Ukraine, Otto Pyatt, called the Ukrainian prosecutor "an obstacle" to anticorruption efforts ^ a b c Kiely, Eugene (September 24, 2019). "Trump Twists Facts on Biden and Ukraine" . FactCheck.org . Annenberg Public Policy Center. Archived from the original on October 3, 2019 . Retrieved October 6, 2019 . ^ Bump, Philip; Blake, Aaron (September 24, 2019). "The full Trump-Ukraine timeline – as of now" . The Washington Post . Archived from the original on October 6, 2019 . Retrieved October 6, 2019 . ^ McLaughlin, Daniel (March 29, 2016). "EU hails sacking of Ukraine's prosecutor Viktor Shokin" . The Irish Times . Archived from the original on October 3, 2019 . Retrieved October 6, 2019 . ^ Baker, Peter (September 23, 2019). "Instead of 'No Collusion!' Trump Now Seems to Be Saying, So What if I Did?" . The New York Times . Archived from the original on October 6, 2019 . Retrieved May 17, 2020 . ^ "Verkhovna Rada Chairperson Volodymyr Groysman calls on all people's deputies to take part in voting for dismissal of prosecutor general Shokin – Verkhovna Rada of Ukraine" . iportal.rada.gov.ua (Press release). March 29, 2016. Archived from the original on September 25, 2019 . Retrieved September 25, 2019 . ^ Kessler, Glenn (October 2, 2019). "Correcting a media error: Biden's Ukraine showdown was in December 2015" . The Washington Post . Archived from the original on October 2, 2019 . Retrieved October 2, 2019 . ^ "Hunter Biden sought US government help for Ukrainian company Burisma" . The Guardian . August 14, 2024. ^ Multiple sources: Kiely, Eugene (October 15, 2020). "Trump Revives False Narrative on Biden and Ukraine" . FactCheck.org . Archived from the original on October 17, 2020 . Retrieved October 17, 2020 . Caldera, Camille (October 21, 2019). "Fact check: Biden leveraged $1B in aid to Ukraine to oust corrupt prosecutor, not to help his son" . USA Today . Archived from the original on October 23, 2020 . Retrieved October 24, 2020 . Hjelmgaard, Kim (October 11, 2019). "Trump's Biden-Ukraine natural gas conspiracy theory: False, but alive" . USA Today . Archived from the original on January 21, 2020 . Retrieved December 17, 2019 . Pilkington, Ed (September 30, 2019). "Five fantasies Trump is pushing about the Ukraine scandal – and the truth" . The Guardian . Archived from the original on October 1, 2019 . Retrieved December 17, 2019 . Timm, Jane C. (October 7, 2019). "Trump is pushing a baseless conspiracy about the Bidens and China. Here's what we know" . NBC News. Archived from the original on May 3, 2020 . Retrieved December 17, 2019 . Timm, Jane C. (September 25, 2019). "There's no evidence for Trump's Biden-Ukraine accusations. What really happened?" . NBC News. Archived from the original on October 1, 2019 . Retrieved December 17, 2019 . Collins, Sean (September 23, 2019). "The facts behind Trump's bogus accusations about Biden and Ukraine" . Vox . Archived from the original on December 18, 2019 . Retrieved December 17, 2019 . Meyer, Jane (October 4, 2019). "The Invention of the Conspiracy Theory on Biden and Ukraine" . The New Yorker . Archived from the original on January 18, 2020 . Retrieved December 9, 2019 . Collins, Ben; Zadrozny, Brandy (November 20, 2019). "As Sondland testified, a misleading Ukraine story spread among conservatives on social media" . NBC News. Archived from the original on November 21, 2019 . Retrieved November 21, 2019 . Mackey, Robert (May 10, 2019). "Republican Conspiracy Theory About a Biden Scandal in Ukraine Is 'Absolute Nonsense' " . The Intercept . Archived from the original on May 10, 2019 . Retrieved May 10, 2019 . Hjelmgaard, Kim (October 11, 2019). "Trump's conspiracy theories thrive in Ukraine, where a young democracy battles corruption and distrust" . USA Today . Archived from the original on November 1, 2020 . Retrieved October 11, 2019 . Phelps, Jordan (November 22, 2019). "Trump continues to push debunked Ukraine conspiracy theory" . ABC News. Archived from the original on November 22, 2019 . Retrieved November 22, 2019 . Meyer, Jane (October 4, 2019). "The Invention of the Conspiracy Theory on Biden and Ukraine" . The New Yorker . Archived from the original on January 18, 2020 . Retrieved October 4, 2019 . ^ Raymond, Adam K. (May 7, 2019). "Everything We Know About the Joe Biden–Ukraine Controversy" . New York . Archived from the original on October 6, 2019 . Retrieved October 6, 2019 . ^ a b Thrush, Glenn ; Vogel, Kenneth P. (November 10, 2019). "What Joe Biden Actually Did in Ukraine" . The New York Times . Archived from the original on June 1, 2020 . Retrieved May 17, 2020 . ^ "Ukrainian Reforms Two Years After the Maidan Revolution and the Russian Invasion Hearing" (PDF) . Senate Foreign Relations Committee Hearing . March 15, 2016. Archived from the original (PDF) on November 19, 2019 . Retrieved April 30, 2020 . [Former ambassador to Ukraine John E. Herbst ]: 'By late fall of 2015, the EU and the United States joined the chorus of those seeking Mr. Shokin's removal as the start of an overall reform of the Procurator General's Office. U.S. Vice President Joe Biden spoke publicly about this before and during his December visit to Kyiv' [...] [Assistant secretary of state Victoria Nuland ]: "[W]e have pegged our next $1 billion loan guarantee, first and foremost, to having a rebooting of the reform coalition so that we know who we are working with, but secondarily, to ensuring that the prosecutor general's office gets cleaned up.' ^ Multiple sources: "Trump: I want to meet my accuser" . Agence France-Presse . September 30, 2019. Archived from the original on October 1, 2019 . Retrieved October 1, 2019 . US President Donald Trump said on Sunday he wants and deserves to meet the anonymous whistleblower at the center of the fast-moving scandal that has triggered an impeachment probe against him ... Brandishing what he said were affidavits incriminating Biden's son Hunter over his work at a Ukrainian company, Giuliani said Trump was duty bound to raise the issue with Kiev. Trump and his allies claim Biden, as Barack Obama's vice president, pressured Kiev to fire the country's top prosecutor to protect his son Hunter, who sat on the board of a gas company, Burisma Holdings, accused of corrupt practices. Those allegations have largely been debunked and there has been no evidence of illegal conduct or wrongdoing in Ukraine by the Bidens. Matthias, Williams; Polityuk, Pavel (September 26, 2019). "Zelenskiy opponents say comments about Europeans to Trump could hurt Ukraine" . Reuters. Archived from the original on October 1, 2019 . Retrieved October 1, 2019 . Trump pressed Zelenskiy to investigate the business dealings of the son of his political rival, former Vice President Joe Biden, the Democratic front-runner to challenge Trump in an election next year. Zelenskiy agreed. Biden's son Hunter worked for a company drilling for gas in Ukraine. There has been no evidence of wrongdoing by either Biden. Isachenkov, Vladimir (September 27, 2019). "Ukraine's prosecutor says there is no probe into Biden" . Associated Press . Archived from the original on October 1, 2019 . Retrieved October 1, 2019 . Though the timing raised concerns among anti-corruption advocates, there has been no evidence of wrongdoing by either the former vice president or his son. "White House 'tried to cover up details of Trump-Ukraine call' " . BBC News. September 26, 2019. Archived from the original on September 30, 2019 . Retrieved October 1, 2019 . There is no evidence of any wrongdoing by the Bidens. Timm, Jane (September 25, 2019). "There's no evidence for Trump's Biden-Ukraine accusations. What really happened?" . NBC News . Archived from the original on October 1, 2019 . Retrieved October 1, 2019 . But despite Trump's continued claims, there's no evidence of wrongdoing on the part of either Biden. ^ * Crowley, Michael (February 11, 2022). "Puzzle in Ukraine Crisis: Where's the U.S. Ambassador?" . New York Times . Archived from the original on August 9, 2022 . Retrieved October 29, 2022 . (No evidence of wrongdoing was found on the part of Hunter Biden or his father. Mr. Trump denied doing anything improper.) ^ Ivanova, Polina; Polityuk, Pavel (September 27, 2019). "Ukraine agency says allegations against Burisma cover period before Biden joined" . Reuters. Archived from the original on October 1, 2019 . Retrieved October 1, 2019 . ^ a b Baker, Stephanie; Krasnolutska, Daryna (May 7, 2019). "Timeline in Ukraine Probe Casts Doubt on Giuliani's Biden Claim" . Bloomberg. Archived from the original on September 17, 2019 . Retrieved October 6, 2019 . ^ Parker, Ashley; Dawsey, Josh; Rucker, Philip (September 25, 2019). "Seven days: Inside Trump's frenetic response to the whistleblower complaint and the battle over impeachment" . The Washington Post . Archived from the original on October 1, 2019 . Retrieved October 6, 2019 . ^ "Ukraine ex-minister rejects Trump's Biden claims" . BBC News. September 27, 2019. Archived from the original on October 8, 2019 . Retrieved October 6, 2019 . ^ Haberman, Maggie ; Fandos, Nicholas ; Crowley, Michael; Vogel, Kenneth P. (September 24, 2019). "Trump Said to Have Frozen Aid to Ukraine Before Call With Its Leader" . The New York Times . Archived from the original on September 27, 2019 . Retrieved May 17, 2020 . ^ Haberman, Maggie ; Shear, Michael D. (September 25, 2019). "Trump Asks Ukraine's Leader to 'Do Us a Favor' and Also Urges Inquiry of Biden" . The New York Times . Archived from the original on September 27, 2019 . Retrieved May 17, 2020 . ^ Barrett, Devlin; Zapotosky, Matt; Leonnig, Carol D. ; Dawsey, Josh (September 25, 2019). "Trump offered Ukrainian president Justice Dept. help for Biden investigation, memo shows" . The Washington Post . Archived from the original on September 27, 2019 . Retrieved October 6, 2019 . ^ Dale, Daniel; Cohen, Marshall (September 25, 2019). "Fact check: Trump made false claim to Ukrainian president to justify his Biden request" . CNN. Archived from the original on September 30, 2019 . Retrieved October 6, 2019 . ^ Fandos, Nicholas (September 24, 2019). "Nancy Pelosi Announces Formal Impeachment Inquiry of Trump" . The New York Times . Archived from the original on January 30, 2020 . Retrieved May 17, 2020 . ^ Wilkinson, Tracy; Loiko, Sergei (September 29, 2019). "Former Ukraine prosecutor says he saw no evidence of wrongdoing by Biden" . Los Angeles Times . Archived from the original on October 4, 2019 . Retrieved October 5, 2019 . ^ "Ukraine to review cases on gas firm linked to Joe Biden's son" . Al Jazeera . October 4, 2019. Archived from the original on October 4, 2019 . Retrieved October 5, 2019 . ^ Desiderio, Andrew (February 28, 2020). "Senate Intel chair privately warned that GOP's Biden probe could help Russia" . Politico . Archived from the original on October 19, 2020 . Retrieved October 19, 2020 . ^ a b Barnes, Julian E.; Rosenberg, Matthew (November 22, 2019). "Charges of Ukrainian Meddling? A Russian Operation, U.S. Intelligence Says" . The New York Times . Archived from the original on May 2, 2020 . Retrieved March 7, 2020 – via NYTimes.com. ^ Fandos, Nicholas (March 5, 2020). "Republicans, Egged On by Trump, Scrutinize Hunter Biden as His Father Surges" . The New York Times . Archived from the original on May 21, 2020 . Retrieved May 17, 2020 . ^ Fandos, Nicholas (May 20, 2020). "Senate Panel, Urged On by Trump, Subpoenas Biden-Related Material" . The New York Times . Archived from the original on July 28, 2020 . Retrieved July 29, 2020 . ^ Vogel, Kenneth P. ; Fandos, Nicholas (March 11, 2020). "Senate Panel Delays Subpoena Vote Over Concerns About Ukraine Witness" . The New York Times . Archived from the original on August 1, 2020 . Retrieved August 8, 2020 . ^ Atwood, Kylie (October 5, 2020). "US revokes visa of Giuliani's Ukrainian ally who spread conspiracy theories about the Bidens" . CNN. Archived from the original on December 5, 2020 . Retrieved December 1, 2020 . ^ dos Santos, Nina. "A Giuliani ally offered cash to lobby US senators on behalf of pro-Russian TV stations" . CNN . Archived from the original on March 15, 2020 . Retrieved March 15, 2020 . ^ Fandos, Nicholas (September 23, 2020). "Republican Inquiry Finds No Evidence of Wrongdoing by Biden" . The New York Times . ISSN 0362-4331 . Archived from the original on September 24, 2020 . Retrieved September 24, 2020 . ^ Blake, Aaron (September 23, 2020). "GOP's Hunter Biden report doesn't back up Trump's actual conspiracy theory — or anything close to it" . The Washington Post . ISSN 0190-8286 . Archived from the original on September 24, 2020 . Retrieved September 24, 2020 . ^ Zhegulev, Ilya (June 4, 2020). "Ukraine found no evidence against Hunter Biden in case audit: former top prosecutor" . Reuters . Archived from the original on June 28, 2020 . Retrieved June 27, 2020 . ^ Sonne, Paul; Helderman, Rosalind S. (May 19, 2020). "Ukrainian lawmaker releases leaked phone calls of Biden and Poroshenko" . The Washington Post . Archived from the original on June 30, 2020 . Retrieved June 30, 2020 . ^ Sonne, Paul; Helderman, Rosalind S. ; Dawsey, Josh; Stern, David L. (June 30, 2020). "Hunt for Biden tapes in Ukraine by Trump allies revives prospect of foreign interference" . The Washington Post . Archived from the original on July 1, 2020 . Retrieved June 30, 2020 . ^ Bertrand, Natasha ; Desiderio, Andrew (June 26, 2020). "Senate panel demands testimony from ex-Obama officials in revived Biden probe" . Politico . Archived from the original on June 28, 2020 . Retrieved June 29, 2020 . ^ Seddiq, Oma (June 21, 2020). "Former Ukrainian president says Biden never pressed him on Burisma" . Politico . Archived from the original on June 30, 2020 . Retrieved June 29, 2020 . ^ Cohen, Zachary; Atwood, Kylie; Cohen, Marshall (September 10, 2020). "Vowing crackdown on Russian meddling, US sanctions Ukrainian lawmaker who worked with Giuliani to smear Biden" . CNN. Archived from the original on October 31, 2020 . Retrieved October 28, 2020 . ^ "Treasury Sanctions Russia-Linked Election Interference Actors" . United States Department of the Treasury . September 10, 2020. Archived from the original on September 11, 2020 . Retrieved September 10, 2020 . ^ Forgey, Quint (January 11, 2021). "Treasury Department announces sanctions tied to Giuliani's Biden attacks" . Politico . Archived from the original on January 12, 2021 . Retrieved January 22, 2021 . ^ Cohen, Zachary; Cohen, Marshall; Polantz, Katelyn (March 16, 2021). "US intelligence report says Russia used Trump allies to influence 2020 election with goal of 'denigrating' Biden" . CNN. Archived from the original on March 19, 2021 . Retrieved March 18, 2021 . ^ Shesgreen, Deirdre (March 16, 2021). "Russia, Iran aimed to sway 2020 election through covert campaigns, US intelligence reports" . USA Today . Archived from the original on March 16, 2021 . Retrieved March 18, 2021 . ^ a b Bertrand, Natasha (September 28, 2020). "Trump sought deals with Moscow mayor" . Politico . Archived from the original on September 29, 2020 . Retrieved September 28, 2020 . ^ Demirjian, Karoun; Hamburger, Tom; Sonne, Paul (September 23, 2020). "GOP senators' report calls Hunter Biden's board position with Ukraine firm 'problematic' but doesn't show it changed U.S. policy" . The Washington Post . Archived from the original on September 28, 2020 . Retrieved September 28, 2020 . ^ Greenberg, Jon (September 29, 2020). "Examining Trump claim that Hunter Biden got $3.5 million from wife of Moscow ex-mayor" . PolitiFact . Archived from the original on October 21, 2020 . Retrieved October 24, 2020 . ^ a b Perez, Evan; Brown, Pamela. "Federal criminal investigation into Hunter Biden focuses on his business dealings in China" . CNN . Archived from the original on December 10, 2020 . Retrieved December 9, 2020 . ^ a b Goldman, Adam; Benner, Katie; Vogel, Kenneth P. (December 10, 2020). "Hunter Biden Discloses He Is Focus of Federal Tax Inquiry" . The New York Times . Archived from the original on February 15, 2021 . Retrieved December 10, 2020 . ^ Areddy, James T.; Duehren, Andrew (December 23, 2020). " 'For Hunter Biden, Family Name Aided Foreign Deals" . Wall Street Journal . Hong Kong. Archived from the original on January 26, 2021 . Retrieved October 11, 2023 . ^ Mangan, Dan (December 9, 2020). "Joe Biden's son Hunter Biden under federal investigation for tax case" . CNBC. Archived from the original on February 15, 2021 . Retrieved December 9, 2020 . ^ Wise, Alana (December 9, 2020). "Hunter Biden Says He Is Under Federal Investigation For Tax Matter: Report" . NPR. Archived from the original on December 10, 2020 . Retrieved December 10, 2020 . ^ "Kevin Morris' loans to Hunter Biden totaled $6.5 million, $1.6 million more than previous estimate" . CBS News . January 23, 2024. ^ "Hunter Biden's legal defense has a problem: The patron paying the bills is running out of cash" . Politico . May 15, 2024. ^ Benner, Katie; Vogel, Kenneth P.; Schmidt, Michael S. (March 16, 2022). "Hunter Biden Paid Tax Bill, but Broad Federal Investigation Continues" . The New York Times . ISSN 0362-4331 . Archived from the original on March 23, 2022 . Retrieved March 31, 2022 . ^ Devine, Curt; Glover, Scott; Scannell, Kara; Perez, Evan (July 27, 2022). "Hunter Biden was repeatedly warned of tax problems, a CNN review of emails shows" . CNN . Archived from the original on August 4, 2022 . Retrieved August 8, 2022 . ^ "Watch: Hunter Biden's emails show deep debt, insufficient funds, and overdue taxes" . CNN . July 27, 2022. Archived from the original on August 8, 2022 . Retrieved August 8, 2022 . ^ a b Barrett, Devlin; Stein, Perry (June 20, 2023). "Hunter Biden reaches deal to plead guilty in tax, gun case" . The Washington Post . Archived from the original on June 20, 2023 . Retrieved June 20, 2023 . ^ Barrett, Devlin; Stein, Perry (October 6, 2022). "Federal agents see chargeable tax, gun-purchase case against Hunter Biden" . The Washington Post . Archived from the original on October 6, 2022 . Retrieved October 6, 2022 . ^ Swan, Betsy Woodruff; Lippman, Daniel (June 3, 2021). "Sources: Dem lobbying firm under federal investigation for Burisma work" . Politico . Archived from the original on March 29, 2022 . Retrieved March 30, 2022 . ^ Evan Perez; Katelyn Polantz (March 30, 2022). "Federal investigation of Hunter Biden heats up" . CNN. Archived from the original on March 31, 2022 . Retrieved March 30, 2022 . ^ "Tax and Firearm Charges Filed Against Robert Hunter Biden" . justice.gov . June 20, 2023. ^ Schmidt, Michael; Entous, Adam (June 20, 2023). "Hunter Biden to Plead Guilty on Misdemeanor Tax Charges" . The New York Times . Archived from the original on June 20, 2023 . Retrieved June 20, 2023 . ^ Debusmann Jr, Bernd (June 21, 2023). "Hunter Biden to plead guilty to tax crimes and admit gun offence" . BBC News . Archived from the original on June 21, 2023 . Retrieved June 21, 2023 . ^ a b Gurman, Sadie; Linskey, Annie; Tau, Byron (July 27, 2023). "Hunter Biden's Courtroom Reversal Extends His Legal Limbo, Political Exposure" . Wall Street Journal . Washington, D.C. Archived from the original on July 27, 2023 . Retrieved July 28, 2023 . ^ Gurman, Sadie; Linskey, Annie; Tau, Byron (July 27, 2023). "Hunter Biden's Courtroom Reversal Extends His Legal Limbo, Political Exposure" . Wall Street Journal . Washington, D.C. Archived from the original on July 27, 2023 . Retrieved July 28, 2023 . In court on Wednesday, prosecutors said there was still the possibility of additional charges against the younger Biden under the Foreign Agents Registration Act, which requires anyone acting on behalf of a foreign government to file reports on their activities with the Justice Department.... The judge asked if the continuing investigation could yield additional charges such as violations of the Foreign Agents Registration Act. "Yes," prosecutor Leo Wise replied. ^ McCausland, Phil; Winter, Tom (July 26, 2023). "Hunter Biden pleads not guilty after plea deal is derailed" . NBC News . Archived from the original on July 26, 2023 . Retrieved July 26, 2023 . ^ Stein, Perry; Barrett, Devlin; Viser, Matt (August 17, 2023). "How a fight over immunity unraveled Hunter Biden's plea deal" . The Washington Post . Archived from the original on August 17, 2023 . Retrieved August 17, 2023 . ^ Reilly, Ryan J. (August 11, 2023). "Attorney General Garland appoints a special counsel in Hunter Biden probe" . NBC News. Archived from the original on August 11, 2023 . Retrieved August 11, 2023 . ^ Savage, Charlie (August 11, 2023). "U.S. Attorney Investigating Hunter Biden Is Made a Special Counsel" . The New York Times . Archived from the original on August 11, 2023 . Retrieved August 11, 2023 . ^ Scannell, Kara (September 6, 2023). "Special counsel to indict Hunter Biden on gun charges this month, DOJ says" . CNN. Archived from the original on September 6, 2023 . Retrieved September 6, 2023 . ^ Whitehurst, Lindsay (September 14, 2023). "Hunter Biden indicted on federal firearms charges in long-running probe weeks after plea deal failed" . AP News . Archived from the original on November 16, 2023 . Retrieved September 14, 2023 . ^ Jansen, Bart. "Hunter Biden indicted on federal gun charges for allegedly lying about drug addiction" . USA TODAY . Archived from the original on September 18, 2023 . Retrieved September 19, 2023 . ^ Thrush, Glenn (September 15, 2023). "The Gun Charges Against Hunter Biden Are Unusual. Here's Why" . The New York Times . ISSN 0362-4331 . Archived from the original on September 18, 2023 . Retrieved September 19, 2023 . ^ Reilly, Ryan (September 14, 2023). "Legal experts say the charges against Hunter Biden are rarely brought" . NBC News . Archived from the original on September 18, 2023 . Retrieved September 19, 2023 . ^ Richer, Alanna Durkin; Long, Colleen (January 16, 2024). "Cocaine residue was found on Hunter Biden's gun pouch in 2018 case, prosecutors say" . AP News . Archived from the original on January 17, 2024 . Retrieved January 17, 2024 . ^ Pitas, Costas; Whitcomb, Dan (December 7, 2023). "DOJ files new criminal charges against Hunter Biden" . Washington, D.C. : Reuters . Archived from the original on December 8, 2023 . Retrieved December 7, 2023 . ^ Whitehurst, Lindsay (December 8, 2023). "Hunter Biden is indicted on 9 tax charges, adding to gun charges in a special counsel investigation" . AP News . Archived from the original on December 12, 2023 . Retrieved December 13, 2023 . ^ Stein, Perry; Barrett, Devlin (January 11, 2024). "Hunter Biden pleads not guilty to tax charges, gets June trial date" . Washington Post . Retrieved January 11, 2024 . ^ a b Lybrand, Holmes (January 11, 2024). "Hunter Biden pleads not guilty to federal tax charges" . CNN . Archived from the original on January 11, 2024 . Retrieved January 11, 2024 . ^ Graf, Rachel; Adler, Maxwell; Voreacos, David (January 11, 2024). "Hunter Biden Pleads Not Guilty to Tax Charges in California" . Bloomberg News. Archived from the original on January 11, 2024 . Retrieved January 11, 2024 . ^ Hawkinson, Katie (May 22, 2024). "Hunter Biden's trial on felony tax charges delayed until September" . The Independent . Retrieved May 22, 2024 . ^ "Hunter Biden loses bid to get tax-dodging charges dismissed" . Courthouse News . April 2, 2024. ^ "Judge denies Hunter Biden's bid to dismiss gun charges" . Politico . May 9, 2024. ^ "Hunter Biden was hired by Romanian businessman trying to 'influence' US agencies, prosecutors say" . Associated Press . August 7, 2024. ^ "Romanian oligarch hired Hunter Biden to influence US policy, special counsel says" . ABC . August 7, 2024. ^ "Hunter Biden's lawyers appear in court ahead of September tax trial" . NBC News. August 21, 2024 . Retrieved August 21, 2024 . ^ Lauer, Claudia; Whitehurst, Lindsay (May 24, 2024). "Hunter Biden gun trial set for June 3 could last up to 2 weeks amid disputes over evidence" . Associated Press . Retrieved May 24, 2024 . ^ a b c Grumbach, Gary; Stand, Rebecca; Hayes, Owen; Marquez, Alexandra (May 24, 2024). "Judge in Hunter Biden's gun charges case sets rules for evidence" . NBC News . Retrieved May 24, 2024 . ^ Lybrand, Holmes; Cohen, Marshall; Grise, Kate (June 3, 2024). "Hunter Biden's trial on federal gun charges" . CNN . Retrieved June 3, 2024 . ^ a b "Hunter Biden's gun trial starts today. Here's what to know" . Politico. June 3, 2024. ^ "Hunter Biden convicted on all 3 charges at federal gun trial" . CNN . June 11, 2024 . Retrieved June 11, 2024 . ^ Stein, Perry; Barrett, Devlin; Viser, Matt (June 11, 2024). "Hunter Biden found guilty in gun trial. What it means and what's next" . The Washington Post . Retrieved June 11, 2024 . ^ Swan, Betsy Woodruff; Gerstein, Josh (June 11, 2024). "Hunter Biden found guilty on federal gun charges" . Politico . Retrieved June 11, 2024 . ^ "Hunter Biden's DC law license suspended due to gun case conviction" . CNN . June 25, 2024. ^ a b c d "President Biden pardons his son Hunter Biden" . NBC News . December 1, 2024 . Retrieved December 2, 2024 . ^ Taxin, Amy; Bharath, Deepa; Lauer, Claudia; Veiga, Alex (September 5, 2024). "Hunter Biden intends to change not guilty plea in his federal tax case, defense attorney says" . Associated Press . Retrieved September 5, 2024 . ^ Bagchi, Aysha (September 5, 2024). "Hunter Biden proposes to accept sentencing and avoid criminal tax trial" . USA Today . Retrieved September 5, 2024 . ^ a b Fitzpatrick, Sarah; Gregorian, Dareh; Wall, Katie (September 5, 2024). "Hunter Biden intends to change his plea in federal tax case to avoid a trial" . NBC News . Retrieved September 5, 2024 . ^ a b Brunner, Raven (September 5, 2024). "Hunter Biden Pleads Guilty to Tax Charges at the Last Minute, Aiming to Avoid Another Trial and Accept Sentence" . People . Retrieved September 5, 2024 . ^ Luna, Jackie (September 5, 2024). "US prosecutors oppose Hunter Biden plea offer in tax case" . Reuters . Retrieved September 5, 2024 . ^ Reid, Paula; Cohen, Marshall; Perez, Evan; Gannon, Casey (September 5, 2024). "Judge punts ruling on Hunter Biden's offer to change plea in tax case to later date" . CNN . Retrieved September 5, 2024 . ^ Ogilvie, Jessica; Viser, Matt; Stein, Perry (September 5, 2024). "Hunter Biden pleads guilty in tax case, avoiding second criminal trial" . The Washington Post . ^ a b c Brown, Erica; Yilek, Caitlin (September 5, 2024). "Hunter Biden pleads guilty to all 9 charges in tax evasion case before trial in Los Angeles" . CBS News . Retrieved September 5, 2024 . ^ "Statement from President Joe Biden" . The White House . December 2, 2024 . Retrieved December 2, 2024 . ^ Morin, Rebecca (December 1, 2024). "President Joe Biden pardons his son Hunter Biden" . USA TODAY . Retrieved December 2, 2024 . ^ Barrett, Devlin (December 2, 2024). "Judge Scuppered Hunter Biden Plea Deal, Not Political Pressure" . The New York Times . Retrieved December 2, 2024 . ^ Lee, Ella (December 2, 2024). "Special counsel objects to dismissing Hunter Biden tax case after pardon" . The Hill . Retrieved December 3, 2024 . ^ "Judge in Hunter Biden tax case calls president's pardon statement an attempt to 'rewrite history' " . NBC . December 4, 2024. ^ "The extraordinary breadth of Hunter Biden's pardon" . The Washington Post . December 2, 2024 . Retrieved December 2, 2024 . ^ "We haven't seen a pardon as sweeping as Hunter Biden's in generations" . Politico . December 2, 2024 . Retrieved December 2, 2024 . ^ Klein, Betsy; Cohen, Marshall (December 2, 2024). "President Biden pardons his son Hunter Biden" . CNN . Retrieved December 2, 2024 . ^ "Biden's pardon of his son Hunter rattles the political world" . The Hill . December 1, 2024 . Retrieved December 2, 2024 . ^ "Biden pardons his son Hunter on gun and tax charges despite previously saying he wouldn't" . PBS News . December 1, 2024 . Retrieved December 2, 2024 . ^ "Joe Biden pardons his son, Hunter Biden" . CBS News . December 1, 2024 . Retrieved December 1, 2024 . ^ Shear, Michael D.; Kanno-Youngs, Zolan (December 1, 2024). "President Pardons His Son, Hunter Biden" . The New York Times . Retrieved December 1, 2024 . ^ a b Prokop, Andrew (March 25, 2022). "The return of Hunter Biden's laptop" . Vox . Archived from the original on March 27, 2022 . Retrieved March 28, 2022 . no evidence has emerged to back up suspicions from former intelligence officials, backed by Biden himself, that the laptop's leak was a Russian plot. ^ Kessler, Glenn (October 15, 2020). "Hunter Biden's alleged laptop: an explainer" . The Washington Post . Archived from the original on October 15, 2020 . Retrieved October 15, 2020 . ^ Benveniste, Alexis (October 18, 2020). "The anatomy of the New York Post's dubious Hunter Biden story" . CNN . Archived from the original on October 19, 2020 . Retrieved October 19, 2020 . ^ Bertrand, Natasha (October 19, 2020). "Hunter Biden story is Russian disinfo, dozens of former intel officials say" . Politico . Archived from the original on October 20, 2020 . Retrieved October 20, 2020 . ^ a b Cohen, Marshall (January 16, 2024). "Special counsel says Hunter Biden's claim of right-wing bias is 'fiction designed for a Hollywood script' " . CNN . Archived from the original on January 18, 2024 . Retrieved January 18, 2024 . ^ "Hunter Biden trial highlights: FBI agent testifies about Hunter Biden's drug use and large cash withdrawals" . NBC News . June 4, 2024. ^ "Prosecutors introduce infamous laptop as evidence" . ABC News . June 4, 2024. ^ Carney, Jordain (February 29, 2024). "In testy interview with GOP, Hunter Biden says father was not involved in business deals" . Politico. Archived from the original on March 2, 2024 . Retrieved February 29, 2024 . ^ "Takeaways from Hunter Biden's combative deposition with Republican lawmakers" . Associated Press . March 1, 2024. ^ Fitzpatrick, Sarah; Gregorian, Dareh (February 1, 2023). "Hunter Biden asks for criminal probe into Trump allies for 'theft' of data from laptop" . NBC News. Archived from the original on February 1, 2023 . Retrieved February 1, 2023 . ^ Viser, Matt (February 1, 2023). "Hunter Biden's lawyers, in newly aggressive strategy, target his critics" . The Washington Post . Archived from the original on May 29, 2023 . Retrieved August 14, 2023 . ^ Kessler, Glenn; Usero, Adriana (January 21, 2023). "How a Hunter Biden conspiracy theory grew, from lone tweet to a big megaphone" . The Washington Post . Archived from the original on January 21, 2023 . Retrieved January 21, 2023 . ^ a b c Nelson, Colleen McCain; Barnes, Julian E. (October 16, 2014). "Biden's Son Hunter Discharged From Navy Reserve After Failing Cocaine Test" . The Wall Street Journal . ISSN 0099-9660 . Archived from the original on May 3, 2019 . Retrieved May 17, 2020 . ^ a b c Ziezulewicz, Geoff (October 25, 2019). "The people Priebus beat out to become an ensign" . Military Times . Springfield, VA. Archived from the original on December 29, 2019 . Retrieved December 29, 2019 . ^ Homan, Timothy R. (September 29, 2020). "Biden hits Trump over military 'losers' remark, defends son" . The Hill . Archived from the original on October 1, 2020 . Retrieved September 30, 2020 . ^ a b Newman, Meredith (July 1, 2019). "Hunter Biden talks about his addiction, 'I was in that darkness' " . The News-Journal . Wilmington, Delaware. Archived from the original on July 3, 2019 . Retrieved October 6, 2019 . ^ Popescu, Adam (February 28, 2020). "There's a New Artist in Town. The Name Is Biden" . The New York Times . Archived from the original on February 28, 2020 . Retrieved September 10, 2021 . ^ Kazakina, Katya (June 14, 2021). "We Spoke to Hunter Biden About His New Life as a Full-Time Artist, and His Personal Quest for 'Universal Truth' Through Painting" . Artnet News . Archived from the original on June 15, 2021 . Retrieved June 16, 2021 . ^ Viser, Matt (January 23, 2024). "Hunter Biden's paintings have sold for a total of $1.5 million" . Washington Post . ^ Schwartz, Mattathias (July 24, 2023). "Exclusive: Hunter Biden's gallery sold his art to a Democratic donor 'friend' who Joe Biden named to a prestigious commission" . Business Insider . Archived from the original on August 12, 2023 . Retrieved August 14, 2023 . Bruce Weinstein, a professional ethicist and ethics trainer, told Insider that the timing of Hirsh Naftali's purchase was significant. "If it was done after her appointment, and she likes the painting, it's less of an issue," he said. "It's more of an issue if she's deciding to buy it beforehand. Then it might be perceived as a quid pro quo." ^ Bowley, Graham; Pogrebin, Robin (August 13, 2021). "A Gallery Sells Hunter Bidens. The White House Says It Won't Know Who's Buying" . The New York Times . ISSN 0362-4331 . Archived from the original on October 8, 2022 . Retrieved October 9, 2022 . ^ Vazquez, Maegan (October 9, 2021). "Hunter Biden's private LA art show renews conflict-of-interest concerns" . CNN . Archived from the original on October 9, 2022 . Retrieved October 9, 2022 . ^ a b Lubin, Rhian (March 6, 2025). "Hunter Biden reveals his dire financial situation after selling one piece of art this year and lackluster book buys" . The Independent . Retrieved March 6, 2025 . His income before December 2023, according to the documents, came from sales of his artwork and his memoir Beautiful Things. "In the 2 to 3 years prior to December 2023, I sold 27 pieces for art at an average price of $54,481.48," Biden said in the filing. "But since then I have only sold 1 piece of art for $36,000." ^ "How Biden's Inner Circle Protected a Faltering President" . The New York Times . January 17, 2025. ^ "White House: Hunter Biden helped with Biden speech prep Monday" . The Hill . July 2, 2024. ^ "Biden's Family Tells Him to Keep Fighting as They Huddle at Camp David" . The New York Times . July 22, 2024. ^ a b "Hunter Biden has joined White House meetings as he stays close to the president post-debate" . NBC . July 2, 2024. ^ "Biden family grapples with pressure on their patriarch to step aside" . The Washington Post . July 20, 2024. ^ a b "Concerns as Hunter Biden acting as 'gatekeeper' to US president" . The Telegraph . July 9, 2024. ^ "Behind the Curtain: Unbendable Biden vs. breaking-point Dems" . Axios . July 7, 2024. ^ Mosk, Matthew (March 17, 2024). "IRS whistleblowers ask judge to dismiss Hunter Biden's lawsuit against the tax agency" . CBS News . Retrieved March 8, 2025 . ^ "Hunter Biden Voluntarily Drops IRS Tax Return Disclosure Suit" . Bloomberg Law . May 1, 2025. ^ a b Granville, Samantha (March 6, 2025). "Hunter Biden says he can't afford to continue laptop-related lawsuit" . BBC News . Retrieved March 8, 2025 . ^ a b Singh, Kanishka (June 14, 2024). "Hunter Biden agrees to drop lawsuit against Rudy Giuliani, court records show" . Reuters . Retrieved March 8, 2025 . ^ Folkenflik, David (July 22, 2024). "Hunter Biden drops lawsuit against Fox, while network scores separate court victory" . NPR . Retrieved March 8, 2025 . ^ a b Freedman, Robert (October 16, 2024). "Former Fox CLO named in Hunter Biden lawsuit" . Legal Dive . Retrieved March 8, 2025 . ^ a b Gardner, David (March 6, 2025). "Hunter Biden Is Homeless and Millions in Debt After L.A. Fires" . The Daily Beast . Retrieved March 6, 2025 . ^ Gregorian, Dareh (March 6, 2025). "Hunter Biden's law license suspended in Washington, D.C., after criminal conviction" . NBC News . Retrieved June 25, 2024 . ^ Fry, Hannah (March 6, 2025). "Hunter Biden's lawsuit in jeopardy after rental home damaged in Palisades fire, financial woes mount" . Los Angeles Times . Retrieved March 6, 2025 . ^ Miller, Zeke. "Trump says he's ending Secret Service protection for Biden's adult children" . KCCI-TV . Associated Press . Retrieved March 17, 2025 . ^ Burack, Emily (November 21, 2022). "Joe Biden's Granddaughter Naomi Biden Is Living at the White House" . Town & Country . Archived from the original on July 31, 2023 . Retrieved December 11, 2023 . ^ Fishman, Margie. "Divorce filing details split of Kathleen, Hunter Biden" . Delaware Online . Archived from the original on July 29, 2023 . Retrieved July 19, 2023 . ^ Tomlinson, Hugh (January 13, 2022). "Hunter Biden's ex-wife details his 'devastating' affair with brother's widow in memoir" . The Times . ISSN 0140-0460 . Archived from the original on January 14, 2022 . Retrieved January 14, 2022 . ^ Heller, Karen (June 14, 2022). "Hunter Biden's ex opens up about why she stayed — and why she left" . The Washington Post . Archived from the original on November 9, 2022 . Retrieved October 29, 2023 . ^ Pearl, Diana (March 2, 2017). "Hallie Biden's Father Says He Supports Her Relationship with Hunter Biden, Her Late Husband's Brother" . People . Archived from the original on October 3, 2019 . Retrieved October 6, 2019 . ^ Nguyen, Tina (May 1, 2019). "Hunter Biden Has Reportedly Broken Up with His Late Brother's Wife" . Vanity Fair . Archived from the original on May 2, 2019 . Retrieved October 6, 2019 . ^ a b "The ex, the wife and the widow: Who's who in the Hunter Biden trial" . The Independent . June 6, 2024. ^ "Judge signs order declaring paternity in Hunter Biden case" . Texarkana Gazette . January 7, 2020. Archived from the original on April 29, 2020 . Retrieved May 17, 2020 . ^ Breuninger, Kevin; Mangan, Dan (January 27, 2020). "Hunter Biden agrees to pay child support to Arkansas woman, avoids contempt hearing" . CNBC . Archived from the original on October 12, 2020 . Retrieved October 16, 2020 . ^ "Hunter Biden settles child support case with Arkansas woman" . Associated Press . June 29, 2023. Archived from the original on July 21, 2023 . Retrieved July 21, 2023 . ^ De La Garza, Erik (March 12, 2020). "Hunter Biden Paternity Case Ends in Settlement With Arkansas Woman" . Courthouse News Service . Archived from the original on January 30, 2021 . Retrieved April 3, 2021 . ^ McFadin, Daniel (December 29, 2022). "Mother of Hunter Biden's daughter asks court to change her name to Biden" . Arkansas Online . Archived from the original on June 6, 2023 . Retrieved July 21, 2023 . ^ Gregorian, Dareh (June 29, 2023). "Hunter Biden settles long-running child support case in Arkansas" . NBC News . Retrieved June 11, 2024 . ^ Viser, Matt (June 29, 2023). "Hunter Biden reaches deal in child support case" . Washington Post . Archived from the original on June 29, 2023 . Retrieved July 21, 2023 . ^ Cohen, Marshall (June 29, 2023). "Hunter Biden settles Arkansas child support case" . CNN . Archived from the original on July 18, 2023 . Retrieved July 21, 2023 . ^ Rogers, Katie (July 1, 2023). "Hunter Biden's Daughter and a Tale of Two Families" . The New York Times . Archived from the original on July 20, 2023 . Retrieved July 21, 2023 . ^ Heil, Emily (June 12, 2019). "Hunter Biden's messy personal life is back in the news. Will it cause political headaches for his dad?" . The Washington Post . Archived from the original on June 13, 2019 . Retrieved June 13, 2019 . ^ Carlson, Adam (April 1, 2020). "Joe Biden's Son Hunter & His Wife Welcome a Son Less Than a Year After Whirlwind Wedding: Report" . People . Archived from the original on April 11, 2020 . Retrieved April 30, 2020 . ^ Stump, Scott (January 21, 2021). "Joe Biden and baby grandson share precious moment at inauguration — and his name is Beau" . Today . Archived from the original on January 21, 2021 . Retrieved January 21, 2021 . ^ Superville, Darlene (April 20, 2021). "Hunter Biden details lifelong addiction struggle in memoir" . Associated Press . Archived from the original on October 6, 2021 . Retrieved October 6, 2021 . ^ Biden, Hunter (April 4, 2021). "Hunter Biden on family tragedies and the drug addiction that nearly destroyed him" . The Sunday Times . ISSN 0140-0460 . Archived from the original on January 14, 2022 . Retrieved January 14, 2022 . ^ a b Neumann, Sean (April 5, 2021). "Hunter Biden Says His Addiction Issues Stemmed from 'Serious Trauma' of Mom's 1972 Car Crash Death" . people.com . People Magazine . Archived from the original on September 29, 2023 . Retrieved October 11, 2023 . ^ "Hunter Biden on addiction: My life is not a tabloid" . BBC News . April 6, 2021. Archived from the original on October 6, 2021 . Retrieved October 6, 2021 . ^ Oliver, David. "Hunter Biden says he was 'smoking crack every 15 minutes', more jaw-dropping moments from memoir 'Beautiful Things' " . USA TODAY . Archived from the original on October 6, 2021 . Retrieved October 6, 2021 . ^ Simon, Scott; Doubek, James; Balaban, Samantha; McNulty, Ed (April 5, 2021). "Through Decades Of Addiction, Hunter Biden Says His Family Never Gave Up On Him" . Morning Edition . NPR . Archived from the original on October 6, 2021. ^ Shaffer, Claire (February 4, 2021). "Hunter Biden Announces Memoir 'Beautiful Things,' Out in April" . Rolling Stone . Archived from the original on February 4, 2021 . Retrieved February 5, 2021 . ^ Egan, Elisabeth (April 3, 2021). "Hunter Biden's Memoir: 7 Takeaways From 'Beautiful Things' " . The New York Times . Archived from the original on April 2, 2021 . Retrieved April 3, 2021 . External links Wikimedia Commons has media related to Hunter Biden . Appearances on C-SPAN v t e Hunter Biden Family Kathleen Buhle (first wife) Melissa Cohen Biden (second wife) Hallie Olivere Biden (former partner) Joe Biden (father) Neilia Hunter Biden (mother) Beau Biden (brother) Ashley Biden (half-sister) Public image Biden–Ukraine conspiracy theory Department of Justice investigation Laptop controversy United States House Oversight Committee investigation into the Biden family In popular culture Beautiful Things If We Break My Son Hunter v t e Joe Biden 46th President of the United States (2021–2025) 47th Vice President of the United States (2009–2017) U.S. Senator from Delaware (1973–2009) Senator Early life and career Classified Information Procedures Act Counterterrorism Act Violence Against Women Act Violent Crime Control and Law Enforcement Act Vice presidency Obama transition Task forces Gun Violence Prevention Protect Students from Sexual Assault First Trump transition Presidency Appointments Cabinet Harris vice presidency Agriculture Commerce Defense Education Energy Executive Office appointments HHS Homeland Security HUD Interior Justice U.S. attorneys Labor State ambassadors Transportation Treasury Veterans Affairs Judicial appointments Jackson Supreme Court candidates Legislation 2021 American Rescue Plan Act Capitol Police Emergency Assistance Act Consolidated Appropriations Act Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act National Defense Authorization Act RENACER Act Uyghur Forced Labor Prevention Act 2022 Bipartisan Safer Communities Act CHIPS and Science Act Consolidated Appropriations Act Electoral Count Reform and Presidential Transition Improvement Act Merger Filing Fee Modernization Act No TikTok on Government Devices Act Pregnant Workers Fairness Act State Antitrust Enforcement Venue Act Emmett Till Antilynching Act Inflation Reduction Act Medical Marijuana and Cannabidiol Research Expansion Act PACT Act National Defense Authorization Act Postal Service Reform Act Respect for Marriage Act Speak Out Act Ukraine Democracy Defense Lend-Lease Act 2023 COVID-19 Origin Act Fiscal Responsibility Act National Defense Authorization Act DCA agreement between Finland and the US 2024 ADVANCE Act Consolidated Appropriations Act National Defense Authorization Act National Security Act Protecting Americans from Foreign Adversary Controlled Applications Act 2025 Social Security Fairness Act Policies Cannabis COVID-19 COVID-19 Advisory Board White House COVID-19 Response Team Economic Biden v. Nebraska Build Back Better Act Build Back Better Plan Elementary and Secondary School Emergency Relief Fund Electoral and ethical Presidential Commission on the Supreme Court Summit for Democracy Environmental 2021 Leaders Summit on Climate Executive Order 13990 Foreign 2021 Russia–United States summit 2023 Chinese balloon incident AUKUS Camp David Principles Afghanistan withdrawal killing of Ayman al-Zawahiri War in Ukraine 2022 visit by Volodymyr Zelenskyy 2023 visit to Ukraine War in Israel Ankara prisoner exchange Immigration A Proclamation on Securing the Border Social 2021 National Day of Unity Space Timeline Transition Inauguration security Celebrating America protests First 100 days 2021 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 2022 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 2023 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 2024 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 January 2025 Second Trump transition Classified documents incident White House cocaine incident Efforts to impeach House Oversight Committee investigation inquiry Executive actions proclamations Opinion polling 2021 2022 2023 2024–2025 Presidential trips international 2021 2022 2023 2024–2025 Death and state funeral of Jimmy Carter Elections U.S. Senate 1972 1978 1984 1990 1996 2002 2008 Vice presidential 2008 campaign selection convention debate election transition 2012 campaign convention debate election Presidential 1988 campaign primaries 2008 campaign primaries debates 2020 campaign endorsements celebrity organizations Congress state and territorial officials municipal officials primaries endorsements debates Unity Task Forces running mate selection convention debates election protests 2024 campaign withdrawal Democratic opposition primaries endorsements protest vote movements debate Family Edward Francis Blewitt (great-grandfather) Neilia Hunter Biden (first wife) Jill Biden (second wife) James Biden (brother) Valerie Biden Owens (sister) Beau Biden (son) Hunter Biden (son) Ashley Biden (daughter) Howard Krein (son-in-law) Hallie Olivere Biden (daughter-in-law) Kathleen Buhle (former daughter-in-law) Melissa Cohen Biden (daughter-in-law) Dogs Champ Major Commander Cat Willow Writings Promises to Keep Promise Me, Dad Tomorrow Will Be Different (foreword) Speeches Inaugural address (2021) Joint session of Congress (2021) State of the Union Address 2022 2023 2024 Warsaw speech (2022) Battle for the Soul of the Nation speech (2022) Farewell address (2025) Media depictions Confirmation The Choice 2020 " Intro to Political Science " My Son Hunter " One Last Ride " The Onion ' s "Diamond Joe" Our Cartoon President Saturday Night Live parodies Spitting Image Related Age and health concerns Awards Beau Biden Cancer Moonshot Biden Foundation Biden Presidential Library Biden–Ukraine conspiracy theory Buy a shotgun Eponyms Hunter Biden laptop controversy I Did That! Let's Go Brandon Public image Sexual assault allegation Situation Room Sleepy Joe 2019 Trump–Ukraine scandal ← Donald Trump → ← Dick Cheney Mike Pence → Category Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Netherlands Norway Poland Catalonia People DDB Other IdRef Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Hunter_Biden&oldid=1288332302 " Categories : Hunter Biden 1970 births 21st-century American businesspeople 21st-century American criminals 21st-century American lawyers 21st-century American male writers 21st-century American memoirists 21st-century American naval officers American businesspeople convicted of crimes American lobbyists American male criminals American people of English descent American people of French descent American people of Irish descent Amtrak people Archmere Academy alumni Biden administration controversies Biden family Boies Schiller Flexner people Catholics from Delaware Children of presidents of the United States Children of vice presidents of the United States Delaware Democrats Georgetown University College of Arts & Sciences alumni Lawyers from Washington, D.C. Lawyers from Wilmington, Delaware Living people Military personnel from Delaware People associated with the 2020 United States presidential election People associated with the 2024 United States presidential election People with traumatic brain injuries People pardoned by Joe Biden Trump–Ukraine scandal United States Navy reservists Yale Law School alumni Hidden categories: All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from August 2024 Articles with permanently dead external links Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Wikipedia extended-confirmed-protected pages Use American English from January 2021 All Wikipedia articles written in American English Use mdy dates from December 2022 Pages using infobox military person with embed Articles with hCards Commons category link from Wikidata People appearing on C-SPAN This page was last edited on 1 May 2025, at 23:29 (UTC) . Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc. , a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Hunter Biden 35 languages Add topic

The Bidens And Burisma: President's Pardon Stretches Back To Son's Time As Ukraine Company Board Member Accessibility links Skip to main content Skip to main Navigation Skip to Search Next Close Previous Next This image contains sensitive content which some people may find offensive or disturbing. Click to reveal Print Options: Images Multimedia Embedded Content Comments Cancel Print Link has been copied to clipboard MORE To Readers In Russia Russia Russia Tatar-Bashkir North Caucasus Iran Central Asia Kazakhstan Kyrgyzstan Tajikistan Turkmenistan Uzbekistan South Asia Afghanistan Pakistan Caucasus Armenia Azerbaijan Georgia Central/SE Europe Bosnia Bulgaria Hungary Kosovo Moldova Montenegro North Macedonia Romania Serbia East Europe Belarus Ukraine Visuals Investigations RFE/RL Investigates Schemes Systema Newsletters Wider Europe by Rikard Jozwiak China In Eurasia by Reid Standish The Farda Briefing Steve Gutterman's Week In Russia Podcasts Majlis Current Time Share Tips Securely Bypass Blocking About RFE/RL Contact Us Subscribe Follow Us All RFE/RL sites Search All RFE/RL websites Search Previous Next Breaking News Ukraine The Bidens And Burisma: President's Pardon Stretches Back To Son's Time As Ukraine Company Board Member December 05, 2024 07:43 CET By Todd Prince U.S. President Joe Biden (left) greets his son Hunter at the Democratic National Convention in Chicago, Illinois, in August. Share The Bidens And Burisma: President's Pardon Stretches Back To Son's Time As Ukraine Company Board Member share Print U.S. President Joe Biden pardoned his son Hunter Biden days before his scheduled sentencing on gun-possession and tax-related charges, despite having repeatedly said he would not do so. The sweeping pardon announced on December 1 exonerates Hunter Biden, 54, from any crime he may have committed between January 1, 2014, and December 1, 2024. That period includes Hunter Biden's controversial stint as a board member of the Ukrainian natural gas company Burisma Holdings, a role that was a touchstone for Republican criticism of Joe Biden and was at the heart of the first of two impeachments of Donald Trump, the former president who will return to the White House in January. Hunter Biden joined the board of Burisma in May 2014, less than three months after Ukrainian President Viktor Yanukovych was pushed from power and fled to Russia in the culmination of the massive, monthslong Euromaidan protests over official corruption and his decision to scrap plans for a trade agreement with the European Union and pursue closer ties with Moscow. Hunter Biden's business partner, Devon Archer, had joined a month earlier, when the U.K. froze a Burisma bank account holding $23 million amid suspicion of money laundering. At the time, Joe Biden was the U.S. vice president and President Barack Obama's point man for Ukraine, which was battling Russian and Russian-backed forces in a war fomented by Moscow in the eastern Donbas region following Yanukovych's departure. Russia had also seized control of Ukraine's Crimean Peninsula. Mykola Zlochevskiy's house outside Kyiv Burisma's owner, Mykola Zlochevskiy, a former environment and natural resources minister, was under investigation for corruption, accused of having used his position to acquire lucrative gas fields. Hunter Biden had no background in the energy industry, sparking speculation he was hired to provide political cover for Burisma and its owner. The United States and its allies were in the process of placing sanctions on former officials in Yanukovych's government who were believed to have enriched themselves. Hunter Biden was paid as much as $50,000 a month, a large amount by U.S. standards. Board members of Apple and Meta, two of the biggest companies in the world, were receiving on average about $30,000 a month at the time. Biden said he never spoke with his son about his work, including Burisma. In 2016, Biden threatened to withhold aid to Ukraine if the government did not dismiss its prosecutor-general, who was widely considered to be hindering corruption investigations. Ahead of the 2020 election, Republicans cast that threat as an attempt by Biden to hinder an investigation into Burisma, without providing any evidence. Overall, Republicans accused Democrat Joe Biden of peddling influence overseas and his son of violating the U.S Foreign Agents Registration Act (FARA), which requires individuals lobbying the U.S. government on the behalf of a foreign state to register with the Justice Department. Hunter Biden served on the Burisma board until April 2019, when his father announced he would challenge then-President Trump in the 2020 election. Trump soon began targeting Hunter Biden's work in Ukraine, and the issue roiled U.S.-Ukrainian relations just as Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelenskiy took office after his election in April 2019. During a phone call that July, Trump asked Zelenskiy to look into the Bidens' activities in Ukraine. The call led to accusations that Trump had conditioned the release of nearly $400 million in military aid on an investigation into the Bidens, and Trump was impeached by the U.S. House of Representatives in December 2019 on charges of abuse of power and obstruction of Congress. The Senate acquitted Trump on both charges in February 2020. Joe Biden defeated Trump in the November 2020 presidential election, but Trump beat Vice President Kamala Harris in the 2024 vote last month and will take office again on January 20. The controversy surrounding Burisma was an unfortunate development for Ukraine, serving only to reinforce its image in the United States as a corrupt state, Oleksandr Krayev, an analyst at Ukrainian Prism, a Kyiv-based think tank, told RFE/RL. "Ukraine was secondary to Hunter Biden's story, [but] we looked like a small corrupt state where evil companies and golden youth launder their money," Krayev said. U.S. presidents frequently pardon a number of nonviolent criminals or commute their sentences shortly before leaving office. But Biden's broad pardon of his son has fueled criticism from Republicans and rankled some supporters who say he is undermining Americans' faith in the judicial system. It has also been criticized in foreign countries, including Ukraine, given the emphasis the United States has placed on the importance of an independent judiciary free of intervention. "This example is disappointing. Practice what you preach," Daria Kalenyuk, executive director of the Anti-Corruption Action Center in Kyiv, told RFE/RL. "Such actions provide Russia and other authoritarian regimes with additional opportunities for propaganda. This is especially harmful in the context of war, when Russia is actively trying to discredit Western democracies and their values." Hunter Biden arrives for his trial on criminal gun charges in Wilmington, Delaware, in June. Hunter Biden had been due to be sentenced on December 12 and 16 in two separate cases. In June, he was found guilty of lying about his drug addiction on a government form required to obtain firearms. Then, in September, he pleaded guilty to falsifying his tax returns and paying his taxes late. While he faced more than a decade in prison, as a first-time, nonviolent offender, he was likely to serve a few years at most and might have avoided prison altogether, legal experts say. In announcing the pardon, Biden accused his Republican opponents of targeting him and his son and expressed concern that this would continue after Trump takes office. "No reasonable person who looks at the facts of Hunter's cases can reach any other conclusion than Hunter was singled out only because he is my son," Biden said in a statement. Whether the incoming Trump administration will seek to pursue an investigation related to Burisma is unclear. Trump said last year that he will name a special counsel to probe the Biden family, though he gave no details about who might be investigated on what possible charges. The pardon does not prevent the Trump administration from pursuing an investigation, but Hunter Biden could ask a court to dismiss any charges , pointing to his broad clemency, experts say. Kyrylo Ovsyaniy contributed to this report from Kyiv Todd Prince Todd Prince is a senior correspondent for RFE/RL based in Washington, D.C. He lived in Russia from 1999 to 2016, working as a reporter for Bloomberg News and an investment adviser for Merrill Lynch. He has traveled extensively around Russia, Ukraine, and Central Asia. FOLLOW Subscribe via RSS Editors' Picks Sanctions, War Tribunal On Agenda As EU Ministers Prepare For Warsaw And Lviv Meetings Ukrainians Bury Relatives In Backyards As Russian Attacks On Pokrovsk Continue A Canceled Vote, Then A Banned Candidate. Now Romania Holds Election Rerun. The Farda Briefing Signup Box Short - 2025 RFE/RL has been declared an "undesirable organization" by the Russian government. If you are in Russia or the Russia-controlled parts of Ukraine and hold a Russian passport or are a stateless person residing permanently in Russia or the Russia-controlled parts of Ukraine, please note that you could face fines or imprisonment for sharing, liking, commenting on, or saving our content, or for contacting us. To find out more, click here . Recommended In Move To Support Radio Free Europe, R.E.M. Releases Remix For World Press Freedom Day ​ Follow Us Quick Hits About RFE/RL Where We Work Terms Of Use Jobs and Internships U.S. Agency For Global Media Legal And Reporting All RFE/RL Sites Contact Us Browse News Features Newsletters Multimedia Podcasts Qishloq Ovozi (January 2014-March 2022) RFE/RL Newsline (Jan 2000-May 2008) Analytical Reports (Jan 2000-June 2008) Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty © 2025 RFE/RL, Inc. All Rights Reserved. XS SM MD LGHunter Biden: What was he doing in China and Ukraine? Skip to content British Broadcasting Corporation Home News Sport Business Innovation Culture Arts Travel Earth Audio Video Live Home News Israel-Gaza War War in Ukraine US & Canada UK UK Politics England N. Ireland N. Ireland Politics Scotland Scotland Politics Wales Wales Politics Africa Asia China India Australia Europe Latin America Middle East In Pictures BBC InDepth BBC Verify Sport Business Executive Lounge Technology of Business Future of Business Innovation Technology Science & Health Artificial Intelligence AI v the Mind Culture Film & TV Music Art & Design Style Books Entertainment News Arts Arts in Motion Travel Destinations Africa Antarctica Asia Australia and Pacific Caribbean & Bermuda Central America Europe Middle East North America South America World’s Table Culture & Experiences Adventures The SpeciaList Earth Natural Wonders Weather & Science Climate Solutions Sustainable Business Green Living Audio Podcasts Radio Audio FAQs Video Live Live News Live Sport Home News Sport Business Innovation Culture Arts Travel Earth Audio Video Live Weather Newsletters Hunter Biden: What was he doing in China and Ukraine? 6 April 2021 Share Save Share Save Getty Images Vice-President Biden in 2016 with his son Hunter looking on Hunter Biden, second son of US President Joe Biden, is being investigated by the Justice Department over his finances including, according to US media reports, some of his business dealings in China. During the 2020 election campaign, he and his father were frequently accused by Donald Trump and his associates of wrongdoing in regards to China and Ukraine, allegations which they both denied. The New York Post reported on an alleged email in which an adviser from a Ukrainian energy company, Burisma, apparently thanked Hunter for inviting him to meet his father, Joe Biden. Asked about the allegations, Joe Biden told a reporter it was a "smear campaign". No criminal activity has been proven, and no evidence has emerged that Mr Biden did anything to intentionally benefit his son. In an interview with the BBC months after his father was sworn in as president, Hunter Biden defended his qualifications for the position at Burisma but added that, in retrospect, he had "missed... the perception that I would create". Claims of influence-peddling are common in Washington DC and Mr Trump's children have also been accused of conflicts of interest in lucrative business deals overseas. They, too, deny wrongdoing. What do we know about the federal investigation? The Justice Department is investigating Hunter Biden's finances including scrutinising some of his past Chinese business dealings and other transactions, a "person familiar with the matter" told The Associated Press in December . The tax investigation was launched in 2018 but Hunter Biden said he had learned about it for the first time in December 2020. Asked about the investigation by US broadcaster CBS this April, the president's son said: "I'm co-operating, completely. And I'm absolutely certain, 100% certain, that at the end of the investigation, that I will be cleared of any wrongdoing." What have the Bidens been accused of in China? The New York Post cited a purported email from Hunter Biden in August 2017 indicating he was receiving a $10m annual fee from a Chinese billionaire for "introductions alone", though it is unclear who was involved in the alleged introductions. Another purported email, which Fox News said it had confirmed, reportedly refers to a deal pursued by Hunter involving China's largest private energy firm. It is said to include a cryptic mention of "10 held by H for the big guy". Fox News cited unnamed sources as saying "the big guy" in the purported email was a reference to Joe Biden. This message is said to be from May 2017. Both emails would date from when the former US vice-president was a private citizen. A former business associate of Hunter Biden has come forward to say he can confirm the allegations. Tony Bobulinski told Fox News that, contrary to Joe Biden's statements that he had nothing to do with his son's business affairs, Hunter had "frequently referenced asking him for his sign-off or advice on various potential deals" in China. Mr Bobulinski, who is reportedly a US Navy veteran, separately told Fox News' Tucker Carlson that he had met on two occasions with Joe Biden to discuss business deals with China, the first time in May 2017 when Barack Obama's former vice-president was a private citizen. He says he asked Joe Biden's brother, James, whether the family was concerned about possible scrutiny of the former vice-president's involvement in a potential business deal with a Chinese entity. Mr Bobulinski told Fox News that James Biden had replied: "Plausible deniability." Mr Bobulinski was invited by Mr Trump to be his guest at the final presidential debate in Nashville, Tennessee on 22 October. What is known about Hunter's dealings in China? In 2013, Hunter flew aboard Air Force Two with his father, who was then vice-president, on an official visit to Beijing, where the younger Biden met investment banker Jonathan Li. Hunter told the New Yorker he had just met Mr Li for "a cup of coffee", but 12 days after the trip a private equity fund, BHR Partners, was approved by the Chinese authorities. Mr Li was chief executive and Hunter was a board member. He would hold a 10% stake. Getty Images Joe Biden walks out of Air Force Two with his granddaughter and son, Hunter Biden BHR is backed by some of China's largest state banks and by local governments, according to US media. Hunter Biden's lawyer said he had joined the board in an unpaid position "based on his interest in seeking ways to bring Chinese capital to international markets". His lawyer also said his client did not acquire his financial stake in BHR until 2017, after his father had left office in the US. Hunter resigned from the board of BHR in April 2020, but still held his 10% stake in BHR as of July this year, according to the company report. What did the New York Post say about Hunter Biden and Ukraine? The New York Post reported an email from April 2015, in which an adviser to Burisma, Vadym Pozharskyi, apparently thanked Hunter Biden for inviting him to meet his father in Washington. Hunter was a director on the board of Burisma - a Ukrainian-owned private energy company while his father was the Obama administration's pointman on US-Ukrainian relations. Hunter was one of several foreigners on its board. The New York Post article did not provide evidence that the meeting had ever taken place. The Biden election campaign said there was no record of any such meeting on the former vice-president's "official schedule" from the time. But in a statement to Politico , the campaign also acknowledged that Mr Biden could have had an "informal interaction" with the Burisma adviser that did not appear on his official schedule, though it said any such encounter would have been "cursory". "Investigations by the press, during impeachment, and even by two Republican-led Senate committees whose work was decried as 'not legitimate' and political by a GOP colleague, have all reached the same conclusion: that Joe Biden carried out official US policy toward Ukraine and engaged in no wrongdoing," said Andrew Bates, a spokesman for Mr Biden. What we know about Biden-Ukraine corruption claims Mr Biden's team has also decried the New York Post story as "Russian disinformation", though it did not say the emails were bogus. The New York Post article was shared by President Trump and his allies. Two of his former advisers, Steve Bannon and Rudy Giuliani, were involved in providing the story and the hard drive containing the alleged emails, to the newspaper. Mr Giuliani says the messages were found on a laptop that Hunter dropped off at a Delaware repair shop in April 2019. Sceptics have noted that Mr Giuliani travelled in December 2019 to Kyiv where he met Ukrainian lawmaker Andriy Derkach, whom the US Treasury has designated as a longtime Kremlin agent. Mr Giuliani has acknowledged trying dig up dirt on the Bidens in Ukraine. But the US Director of National Intelligence, John Ratcliffe, told Fox Business that the purported emails were not connected to a Russian disinformation effort. Other US media say they have been unable to verify the authenticity of the emails. Hunter has neither confirmed nor denied that he dropped off a laptop at the location. Hunter joined Burisma in 2014, and remained on the board until April 2019, when he decided to leave. Speaking to the BBC, he said Burisma had seen his name "as gold" and that it had played a large part in his appointment to the board. Twitter and Facebook's action over Joe Biden article reignites bias claims What are the Bidens accused of in Ukraine? Donald Trump and his allies accused Joe Biden of wrongdoing because he had pushed, while vice-president, for the Ukrainian government to fire its top prosecutor, who was investigating the company for which Hunter worked. In 2016, Joe Biden called for the dismissal of Ukrainian prosecutor Viktor Shokin, whose office had Burisma and other companies under investigation. However, other Western leaders and major bodies that give financial support to Ukraine also wanted the prosecutor dismissed because they believed he was not active enough in tackling corruption. What else has the Biden campaign said? Shortly before the final presidential debate last year, the Democrat's camp released a statement denying wrongdoing. "Joe Biden has never even considered being involved in business with his family, nor in any overseas business whatsoever," said the statement. "He has never held stock in any such business arrangements nor has any family member or any other person ever held stock for him. "What is true is that Tony Bobulinski admitted on the record to Breitbart that he is angry that he was *not* able to go into business with Hunter and James Biden [Joe Biden's brother]." What did this have to do with impeachment? In 2019, details emerged of a phone call Mr Trump, the then president, had made to the president of Ukraine, in which he had urged the Ukrainian leader to investigate the Bidens. President Trump's impeachment explained This led to charges by the Democrats that Mr Trump was trying to illegally pressure Ukraine to help damage his election rival, resulting in impeachment by the House of Representatives. Mr Trump denied he had done anything wrong, and he was later acquitted by the Republican-controlled US Senate. Getty Images President Trump holds a copy of The Washington Post the day after the US Senate acquitted him on two articles of impeachment Has anything been proven against the Bidens? While no criminal activity has been proven, it has raised questions about potential conflicts of interest. A senior State Department official raised such concerns as far back as 2015. Joe Biden's son defends foreign dealings US Republican lawmakers launched an investigation and found last year that Hunter's work for the Ukrainian firm had been "problematic" - but there wasn't evidence that US foreign policy was influenced by it. No criminal charges were proven against Burisma either. The company issued a statement in 2017 saying "all legal proceedings and pending criminal allegations" against it were closed. Last year, Yuriy Lutsenko, the prosecutor in Ukraine who succeeded Viktor Shokin, told the BBC that there was no reason to investigate the Bidens under Ukrainian law. There is nothing illegal about sitting on a board of a company whilst family members serve in government. Hunter Biden's lawyers said in statement in October 2019 that he had undertaken "these business activities independently. He did not believe it appropriate to discuss them with his father, nor did he." Hunter told the New Yorker magazine that on the only occasion he had mentioned Burisma: "Dad said, 'I hope you know what you are doing.'" Amid all the scrutiny, Joe Biden promised last year that if he was elected president, no-one in his family would hold a job or have a business relationship with a foreign corporation or foreign government. Impeachment of Donald Trump US election 2020 BBC Verify Hunter Biden Joe Biden Related Jeremy Bowen: Trump-Zelensky row signals looming crisis between Europe and US 1 Mar 2025 World 'The boss' featured at Trump hush-money trial 25 Apr 2024 US & Canada How did US impeachments go from rare to routine? 28 Sep 2023 US & Canada More 21 hrs ago Trump's former VP Mike Pence receives JFK Courage Award Pence defied calls by Donald Trump to overturn the result of the 2020 election, and was shunned by Republicans as a result. 21 hrs ago US & Canada 25 Apr 2025 What would it mean for Ukraine to temporarily give up land? As Ukraine reckons with the terms of a possible peace deal, BBC Verify asks what it could mean in practice. 25 Apr 2025 BBC Verify 16 Apr 2025 Watch: Biden attacks Trump in first speech since leaving White House The former US president says his successor has "done so much damage and so much destruction" in his first days in office. 16 Apr 2025 US & Canada 16 Apr 2025 Biden attacks Trump in first speech since leaving White House The ex-president uses the speech to criticise the Trump administration's cuts to the welfare agency. 16 Apr 2025 US & Canada 15 Apr 2025 Trump blames Zelensky for starting war after massive Russian attack The US president apportioned blame to Ukraine's leader hours after the deadliest strike on civilians this year. 15 Apr 2025 World British Broadcasting Corporation Home News Sport Business Innovation Culture Arts Travel Earth Audio Video Live Weather BBC Shop BritBox BBC in other languages Follow BBC on: Terms of Use About the BBC Privacy Policy Cookies Accessibility Help Contact the BBC Advertise with us Do not share or sell my info Contact technical support Copyright 2025 BBC. All rights reserved. The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites. Read about our approach to external linking.Hunter Biden: What was he doing in China and Ukraine? Skip to content British Broadcasting Corporation Home News Sport Business Innovation Culture Arts Travel Earth Audio Video Live Home News Israel-Gaza War War in Ukraine US & Canada UK UK Politics England N. Ireland N. Ireland Politics Scotland Scotland Politics Wales Wales Politics Africa Asia China India Australia Europe Latin America Middle East In Pictures BBC InDepth BBC Verify Sport Business Executive Lounge Technology of Business Future of Business Innovation Technology Science & Health Artificial Intelligence AI v the Mind Culture Film & TV Music Art & Design Style Books Entertainment News Arts Arts in Motion Travel Destinations Africa Antarctica Asia Australia and Pacific Caribbean & Bermuda Central America Europe Middle East North America South America World’s Table Culture & Experiences Adventures The SpeciaList Earth Natural Wonders Weather & Science Climate Solutions Sustainable Business Green Living Audio Podcasts Radio Audio FAQs Video Live Live News Live Sport Home News Sport Business Innovation Culture Arts Travel Earth Audio Video Live Weather Newsletters Hunter Biden: What was he doing in China and Ukraine? 6 April 2021 Share Save Share Save Getty Images Vice-President Biden in 2016 with his son Hunter looking on Hunter Biden, second son of US President Joe Biden, is being investigated by the Justice Department over his finances including, according to US media reports, some of his business dealings in China. During the 2020 election campaign, he and his father were frequently accused by Donald Trump and his associates of wrongdoing in regards to China and Ukraine, allegations which they both denied. The New York Post reported on an alleged email in which an adviser from a Ukrainian energy company, Burisma, apparently thanked Hunter for inviting him to meet his father, Joe Biden. Asked about the allegations, Joe Biden told a reporter it was a "smear campaign". No criminal activity has been proven, and no evidence has emerged that Mr Biden did anything to intentionally benefit his son. In an interview with the BBC months after his father was sworn in as president, Hunter Biden defended his qualifications for the position at Burisma but added that, in retrospect, he had "missed... the perception that I would create". Claims of influence-peddling are common in Washington DC and Mr Trump's children have also been accused of conflicts of interest in lucrative business deals overseas. They, too, deny wrongdoing. What do we know about the federal investigation? The Justice Department is investigating Hunter Biden's finances including scrutinising some of his past Chinese business dealings and other transactions, a "person familiar with the matter" told The Associated Press in December . The tax investigation was launched in 2018 but Hunter Biden said he had learned about it for the first time in December 2020. Asked about the investigation by US broadcaster CBS this April, the president's son said: "I'm co-operating, completely. And I'm absolutely certain, 100% certain, that at the end of the investigation, that I will be cleared of any wrongdoing." What have the Bidens been accused of in China? The New York Post cited a purported email from Hunter Biden in August 2017 indicating he was receiving a $10m annual fee from a Chinese billionaire for "introductions alone", though it is unclear who was involved in the alleged introductions. Another purported email, which Fox News said it had confirmed, reportedly refers to a deal pursued by Hunter involving China's largest private energy firm. It is said to include a cryptic mention of "10 held by H for the big guy". Fox News cited unnamed sources as saying "the big guy" in the purported email was a reference to Joe Biden. This message is said to be from May 2017. Both emails would date from when the former US vice-president was a private citizen. A former business associate of Hunter Biden has come forward to say he can confirm the allegations. Tony Bobulinski told Fox News that, contrary to Joe Biden's statements that he had nothing to do with his son's business affairs, Hunter had "frequently referenced asking him for his sign-off or advice on various potential deals" in China. Mr Bobulinski, who is reportedly a US Navy veteran, separately told Fox News' Tucker Carlson that he had met on two occasions with Joe Biden to discuss business deals with China, the first time in May 2017 when Barack Obama's former vice-president was a private citizen. He says he asked Joe Biden's brother, James, whether the family was concerned about possible scrutiny of the former vice-president's involvement in a potential business deal with a Chinese entity. Mr Bobulinski told Fox News that James Biden had replied: "Plausible deniability." Mr Bobulinski was invited by Mr Trump to be his guest at the final presidential debate in Nashville, Tennessee on 22 October. What is known about Hunter's dealings in China? In 2013, Hunter flew aboard Air Force Two with his father, who was then vice-president, on an official visit to Beijing, where the younger Biden met investment banker Jonathan Li. Hunter told the New Yorker he had just met Mr Li for "a cup of coffee", but 12 days after the trip a private equity fund, BHR Partners, was approved by the Chinese authorities. Mr Li was chief executive and Hunter was a board member. He would hold a 10% stake. Getty Images Joe Biden walks out of Air Force Two with his granddaughter and son, Hunter Biden BHR is backed by some of China's largest state banks and by local governments, according to US media. Hunter Biden's lawyer said he had joined the board in an unpaid position "based on his interest in seeking ways to bring Chinese capital to international markets". His lawyer also said his client did not acquire his financial stake in BHR until 2017, after his father had left office in the US. Hunter resigned from the board of BHR in April 2020, but still held his 10% stake in BHR as of July this year, according to the company report. What did the New York Post say about Hunter Biden and Ukraine? The New York Post reported an email from April 2015, in which an adviser to Burisma, Vadym Pozharskyi, apparently thanked Hunter Biden for inviting him to meet his father in Washington. Hunter was a director on the board of Burisma - a Ukrainian-owned private energy company while his father was the Obama administration's pointman on US-Ukrainian relations. Hunter was one of several foreigners on its board. The New York Post article did not provide evidence that the meeting had ever taken place. The Biden election campaign said there was no record of any such meeting on the former vice-president's "official schedule" from the time. But in a statement to Politico , the campaign also acknowledged that Mr Biden could have had an "informal interaction" with the Burisma adviser that did not appear on his official schedule, though it said any such encounter would have been "cursory". "Investigations by the press, during impeachment, and even by two Republican-led Senate committees whose work was decried as 'not legitimate' and political by a GOP colleague, have all reached the same conclusion: that Joe Biden carried out official US policy toward Ukraine and engaged in no wrongdoing," said Andrew Bates, a spokesman for Mr Biden. What we know about Biden-Ukraine corruption claims Mr Biden's team has also decried the New York Post story as "Russian disinformation", though it did not say the emails were bogus. The New York Post article was shared by President Trump and his allies. Two of his former advisers, Steve Bannon and Rudy Giuliani, were involved in providing the story and the hard drive containing the alleged emails, to the newspaper. Mr Giuliani says the messages were found on a laptop that Hunter dropped off at a Delaware repair shop in April 2019. Sceptics have noted that Mr Giuliani travelled in December 2019 to Kyiv where he met Ukrainian lawmaker Andriy Derkach, whom the US Treasury has designated as a longtime Kremlin agent. Mr Giuliani has acknowledged trying dig up dirt on the Bidens in Ukraine. But the US Director of National Intelligence, John Ratcliffe, told Fox Business that the purported emails were not connected to a Russian disinformation effort. Other US media say they have been unable to verify the authenticity of the emails. Hunter has neither confirmed nor denied that he dropped off a laptop at the location. Hunter joined Burisma in 2014, and remained on the board until April 2019, when he decided to leave. Speaking to the BBC, he said Burisma had seen his name "as gold" and that it had played a large part in his appointment to the board. Twitter and Facebook's action over Joe Biden article reignites bias claims What are the Bidens accused of in Ukraine? Donald Trump and his allies accused Joe Biden of wrongdoing because he had pushed, while vice-president, for the Ukrainian government to fire its top prosecutor, who was investigating the company for which Hunter worked. In 2016, Joe Biden called for the dismissal of Ukrainian prosecutor Viktor Shokin, whose office had Burisma and other companies under investigation. However, other Western leaders and major bodies that give financial support to Ukraine also wanted the prosecutor dismissed because they believed he was not active enough in tackling corruption. What else has the Biden campaign said? Shortly before the final presidential debate last year, the Democrat's camp released a statement denying wrongdoing. "Joe Biden has never even considered being involved in business with his family, nor in any overseas business whatsoever," said the statement. "He has never held stock in any such business arrangements nor has any family member or any other person ever held stock for him. "What is true is that Tony Bobulinski admitted on the record to Breitbart that he is angry that he was *not* able to go into business with Hunter and James Biden [Joe Biden's brother]." What did this have to do with impeachment? In 2019, details emerged of a phone call Mr Trump, the then president, had made to the president of Ukraine, in which he had urged the Ukrainian leader to investigate the Bidens. President Trump's impeachment explained This led to charges by the Democrats that Mr Trump was trying to illegally pressure Ukraine to help damage his election rival, resulting in impeachment by the House of Representatives. Mr Trump denied he had done anything wrong, and he was later acquitted by the Republican-controlled US Senate. Getty Images President Trump holds a copy of The Washington Post the day after the US Senate acquitted him on two articles of impeachment Has anything been proven against the Bidens? While no criminal activity has been proven, it has raised questions about potential conflicts of interest. A senior State Department official raised such concerns as far back as 2015. Joe Biden's son defends foreign dealings US Republican lawmakers launched an investigation and found last year that Hunter's work for the Ukrainian firm had been "problematic" - but there wasn't evidence that US foreign policy was influenced by it. No criminal charges were proven against Burisma either. The company issued a statement in 2017 saying "all legal proceedings and pending criminal allegations" against it were closed. Last year, Yuriy Lutsenko, the prosecutor in Ukraine who succeeded Viktor Shokin, told the BBC that there was no reason to investigate the Bidens under Ukrainian law. There is nothing illegal about sitting on a board of a company whilst family members serve in government. Hunter Biden's lawyers said in statement in October 2019 that he had undertaken "these business activities independently. He did not believe it appropriate to discuss them with his father, nor did he." Hunter told the New Yorker magazine that on the only occasion he had mentioned Burisma: "Dad said, 'I hope you know what you are doing.'" Amid all the scrutiny, Joe Biden promised last year that if he was elected president, no-one in his family would hold a job or have a business relationship with a foreign corporation or foreign government. Impeachment of Donald Trump US election 2020 BBC Verify Hunter Biden Joe Biden Related Jeremy Bowen: Trump-Zelensky row signals looming crisis between Europe and US 1 Mar 2025 World 'The boss' featured at Trump hush-money trial 25 Apr 2024 US & Canada How did US impeachments go from rare to routine? 28 Sep 2023 US & Canada More 21 hrs ago Trump's former VP Mike Pence receives JFK Courage Award Pence defied calls by Donald Trump to overturn the result of the 2020 election, and was shunned by Republicans as a result. 21 hrs ago US & Canada 25 Apr 2025 What would it mean for Ukraine to temporarily give up land? As Ukraine reckons with the terms of a possible peace deal, BBC Verify asks what it could mean in practice. 25 Apr 2025 BBC Verify 16 Apr 2025 Watch: Biden attacks Trump in first speech since leaving White House The former US president says his successor has "done so much damage and so much destruction" in his first days in office. 16 Apr 2025 US & Canada 16 Apr 2025 Biden attacks Trump in first speech since leaving White House The ex-president uses the speech to criticise the Trump administration's cuts to the welfare agency. 16 Apr 2025 US & Canada 15 Apr 2025 Trump blames Zelensky for starting war after massive Russian attack The US president apportioned blame to Ukraine's leader hours after the deadliest strike on civilians this year. 15 Apr 2025 World British Broadcasting Corporation Home News Sport Business Innovation Culture Arts Travel Earth Audio Video Live Weather BBC Shop BritBox BBC in other languages Follow BBC on: Terms of Use About the BBC Privacy Policy Cookies Accessibility Help Contact the BBC Advertise with us Do not share or sell my info Contact technical support Copyright 2025 BBC. All rights reserved. The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites. Read about our approach to external linking.The Bidens’ Influence Peddling Timeline - United States House Committee on Oversight and Accountability Skip to main content Toggle navigation Search About Chairman James Comer Full Committee Rules Committee Activity Calendar Hearings Letters Markups Reports Forums Subcommittees Cybersecurity, Information Technology, and Government Innovation Economic Growth, Energy Policy, and Regulatory Affairs Government Operations Health Care and Financial Services Military and Foreign Affairs Federal Law Enforcement Delivering on Government Efficiency Task Force on the Declassification of Federal Secrets Media Center Press Releases The Overview Biden Family Investigation The Bidens’ Influence Peddling Timeline Biden's Border Crisis COVID Origins Blow the Whistle The Bidens’ Influence Peddling Timeline Since taking the gavel in January, the Committee on Oversight and Accountability has accelerated its investigation of the Biden family’s domestic and international business practices to determine whether the Biden family has been targeted by foreign actors, President Biden is compromised, and our national security is threatened. Records obtained through the Committee’s subpoenas to date reveal that the Bidens and their associates have received over $20 million in payments from foreign entities. Below is a timeline that details key dates in our investigation. The main points of interest are: 1) Romania: On September 28, 2015, Vice President Biden welcomed Romanian President Klaus Iohannis to the White House. Within five weeks of this meeting, a Romanian businessman involved with a high-profile corruption prosecution in Romania, Gabriel Popoviciu, began depositing a Biden associate’s bank account, which ultimately made their way into Biden family accounts. Popoviciu made sixteen of the seventeen payments, totaling over $3 million, to the Biden associate account while Joe Biden was Vice President. Biden family accounts ultimately received approximately $1.038 million. The total amount from Romania to the Biden family and their associates is over $3 million. 2) China- CEFC: On March 1, 2017—less than two months after Vice President Joe Biden left public office—State Energy HK Limited, a Chinese company, wired $3 million to a Biden associate’s account. This is the same bank account used in the above “Romania” section. After the Chinese company wired the Biden associate account the $3 million, the Biden family received approximately $1,065,692 over a three-month period in different bank accounts. Additionally, the CEFC Chairman gives Hunter Biden a diamond worth $80,000. Lastly, CEFC creates a joint venture with the Bidens in the summer of 2017. The timeline lays out the “WhatsApp” messages and subsequent wires from the Chinese to the Bidens of $100,000 and $5 million. The total amount from China, specifically with CEFC and their related entities, to the Biden family and their associates is over $8 million. 3) Kazakhstan: On April 22, 2014, Kenes Rakishev, a Kazakhstani oligarch used his Singaporean entity, Novatus Holdings, to wire one of Hunter Biden’s Rosemont Seneca entities $142,300. The very next day—April 23, 2014—the Rosemont Seneca entity transferred the exact same amount of money to a car dealership for a car for Hunter Biden. Hunter Biden and Devon Archer would represent Burisma in Kazakhstan in May/June of 2014 as the company attempted to broker a three-way deal among Burisma, the Kazakhstan government, and a Chinese state-owned energy company. 4) Ukraine: Devon Archer joined the Burisma board of directors in spring of 2014 and was joined by Hunter Biden shortly thereafter. Hunter Biden joined the company as counsel, but after a meeting with Burisma owner Mykola Zlochevsky in Lake Como, Italy, was elevated to the board of directors in the spring of 2014. Both Biden and Archer were each paid $1 million per year for their positions on the board of directors. In December 2015, after a Burisma board of directors meeting, Zlochevsky and Hunter Biden “called D.C.” in the wake of mounting pressures the company was facing. Zlochevsky was later charged with bribing Ukrainian officials with $6 million in an attempt to delay or drop the investigation into his company. The total amount from Ukraine to the Biden family and their associates is $6.5 million. 5) Russia: On February 14, 2014, a Russian oligarch and Russia’s richest woman, Yelena Baturina, wired a Rosemont Seneca entity $3.5 million. On March 11, 2014, the wire was split up: $750,000 was transferred to Devon Archer, and the remainder was sent to Rosemont Seneca Bohai, a company Devon Archer and Hunter Biden split equally. In spring of 2014, Yelena Baturina joined Hunter Biden and Devon Archer to share a meal with then-Vice President Biden at a restaurant in Washington, D.C. The total amount from Russia to the Biden family and their associates is $3.5 million. Beyond this timeline, here are links to our First , Second , Third , and Fourth Bank Memorandums that provide detailed descriptions and show actual bank records and wires. Biden Family Timeline China – BHR China- CEFC Hunter Biden Criminal Investigation Kazakhstan Romania Russia Ukraine 2009 January 20, 2009 Important Date Obama-Biden Administration begins. 2013 November 1, 2013 China – BHR Hunter Biden, business associate, and Chinese investors agree to create Bohai Harvest RST Equity Investment Fund Management Co., Ltd. (BHR), an investment fund controlled by the Bank of China, to focus on mergers and acquisitions, and investment in and reforms of state-owned enterprise. December 4, 2013 China – BHR Vice President Biden travels with Hunter Biden on Air Force 2 to China and meets CEO of BHR, Jonathan Li. Shortly thereafter, BHR’s business license was approved and Hunter Biden was a board member. 2014 February 5, 2014 Kazakhstan Hunter Biden met Kazakhstani oligarch Kenes Rakishev at the Hay Adams Hotel in Washington, D.C. In email correspondences with Devon Archer surrounding the meeting, Rakishev requested Secretary of State John Kerry visit Kazakhstan. Archer replied, “if we have some business started as planned I will ensure its planned soonest.” Rakishev is a Kazakhstani oligarch and millionaire and was a director at Kazakhstan’s state-owned oil company KazMunayGas. Rakishev maintained close ties to Karim Massimov, who became prime minister on April 2, 2014. February 14, 2014 Russia Russian oligarch Yelena Baturina – the wealthiest woman in Russia and then married to the former mayor of Moscow—wired the Rosemont Seneca Thornton bank account $3.5 million. Rosemont Seneca Thornton’s beneficiary was Rosemont Seneca Partners, of which Hunter Biden was the chairman. March 11, 2014 Russia Rosemont Seneca Thornton transferred $2,752,711 to a Rosemont Seneca Bohai bank account. Also on March 11, 2014, $750,000 of the original wire from Baturina was sent to Devon Archer from Rosemont Seneca Thornton. Rosemont Seneca Bohai was an entity used by both Hunter Biden and Devon Archer. In his testimony to the Committee, Archer confirmed that he and Hunter Biden were 50-50 owners in Rosemont Seneca Bohai. Rosemont Seneca Bohai was opened in Delaware on February 13, 2014—the day before the $3.5 million wire from Yelena Baturina. The bank records can be found in the third bank records memo. April 1, 2014 Russia and Kazakhstan In the spring of 2014, after Yelena Baturina sent the $3.5 million wire to Rosemont Seneca Thornton and around the same time that Kenes Rakishev wired money to Rosemont Seneca Bohai for Hunter Biden’s sportscar, Vice President Biden attended dinner with Yelena Baturina, Kenes Rakishev, Karim Massimov, Hunter Biden, Devon Archer, and others at Café Milano in Washington, D.C. Joe Biden stayed for dinner. Devon Archer provided this information during his transcribed interview . April 15, 2014 Ukraine Burisma, a Ukrainian energy company, appoints Biden business associate to their board of directors. April 22, 2014 Kazakhstan Kenes Rakishev’s Singaporean company wires $142,300 through his Latvian company to a Rosemont entity. The details can be found in the third bank records memorandum . April 22, 2014 Ukraine Vice President Biden travels to Ukraine and gives an anti-corruption speech. April 23, 2014 Kazakhstan The Rosemont entity wires $142,300 to a car dealership in New Jersey for a new sports car for Hunter Biden. The details can be found in the third bank records memorandum . May 12, 2014 Ukraine Burisma announces Hunter Biden joined its board of directors. May 21, 2014 Romania Vice President Biden visits Romania and delivers a speech to the Romanian Prime Minister, judges, prosecutors, and leaders of the Romanian Parliament. September 12, 2014 China – BHR BHR invests $1.7 billion in CCP-linked petroleum and chemical company. December 9, 2014 China – BHR Hunter Biden and business associate invest $484,920 into BHR. December 22, 2014 Kazakhstan Kenes Rakishev’s Kazakhstani oil company and Burisma join with a CCP-linked company and announce a transnational financial arrangement. 2015 April 16, 2015 Ukraine and Kazakhstan On April 16, 2015, Vice President Joe Biden attended a dinner with Karim Massimov, Vadym Pozharsky, Hunter Biden, Devon Archer, and others at Café Milano in Washington, D.C. Devon Archer provided this information during his transcribed interview . September 15, 2015 China – BHR BHR joins with a CCP-linked entity to acquire US-based Henniges Automotive in a deal reportedly worth $600 million. September 28, 2015 Romania Vice President Biden welcomes Romanian President Klaus Iohannis to the White House. A readout of the meeting states, the “Vice President welcomed President Iohannis’ focus on anti-corruption efforts and rule of law as a means to strengthen national security and promote greater investment and economic growth.” President Iohannis said the Vice President “voiced satisfaction over Romania’s progress with the fight against corruption.” November 2, 2015 Ukraine Vadym Pozharskyi suggests high level U.S. level officials come to Ukraine and talk with Prosecutor General Viktor Shokin and President Petro Poroshenko about Mykola Zlochevsky’s investigations. Prosecutor General Shokin was investigating Burisma and Burisma’s owner, Zlochevsky for fraud. Prosecutor General Shokin is the Ukranian government official Vice President Biden demanded Poroshenko fire. November 5, 2015 Romania Romanian businessman, Gabriel Popoviciu, begins making deposits into Robinson Walker, LLC’s bank account. Robinson Walker, LLC is an entity owned by a Biden associate, Rob Walker. Popoviciu’s company sent Robinson Walker the first wire for $179,836.86. From November 2015 to May 2017, Popoviciu’s company paid Robinson Walker, LLC over $3 million. Biden family accounts received approximately $1.038 million from the Robinson Walker, LLC account after Popoviciu’s deposits. Sixteen of the seventeen payments from Popoviciu’s company to Robinson Walker, LLC were made while Joe Biden was Vice President. Details can be found in the Second Bank Records Memorandum . November 6, 2015 Ukraine Amos Hochstein, a high level U.S. government offical working in the Obama-Biden Administration, meets with Hunter Biden and discusses Burisma. November 9, 2015 Romania Rob Walker’s account wires Hunter Biden $59,900. Details can be found in the Second Bank Records Memorandum. November 11, 2015 Ukraine Amos Hochstein meets with Vice President Biden in the West Wing. November 12, 2015 Ukraine Amos Hochstein calls Hunter Biden. November 13, 2015 Romania Hunter Biden meets with the U.S. Ambassador to Romania. November 13, 2015 Ukraine VP Biden touched down in Ukraine last night. Read his initial notes from the road: https://t.co/FdPysDjiqT pic.twitter.com/ybZFp7frYe — VP Biden (Archived) (@VP44) December 7, 2015 Vice President Biden announces trip to Ukraine to take place the first week of December 2015. November 14, 2015 Ukraine Vadym Pozharskyi emails Hunter Biden confirmation that the Vice President will be traveling to Ukraine. November 14, 2015 Romania Hunter Biden meets with the Ambassador of Romania to the United States. November 15, 2015 Romania Hunter Biden travels to Romania. December 4, 2015 Ukraine Mykola Zlochevsky and Vadym Pozharsky complain about constant “government pressures” and urge Hunter Biden to call the Vice President of the United States, Joe Biden. Devon Archer testified that Hunter Biden, Zlochevsky, and Pozharsky “called D.C.” Devon Archer provided this information during his transcribed interview . December 7, 2015 China – CEFC Hunter Biden and CEFC Chairman Ye Jianming begin communicating regarding a possible U.S. partnership. December 7, 2015 Romania Robinson Walker, LLC wires Hunter Biden $59,725. Details can be found in the Second Bank Records Memorandum. December 7, 2015 Ukraine https://oversight.house.gov/wp-content/uploads/2023/07/Biden-Firing-Ukraine-Prosecutor-Clip.mp4 Vice President Biden arrives in Ukraine, where he demands Prosecutor General Shokin be fired if Ukraine wants $1 billion in International Monetary Fund (IMF) loans. December 9, 2015 Ukraine Vice President Biden departs Ukraine and gets a commitment from President Poroshenko that Prosecutor General Shokin will be fired. December 17, 2015 Ukraine Vice President Biden hosts a holiday party at the Vice Presidential residence, which Amos Hochstein and Hunter Biden both attend. December 23, 2015 Romania Robinson Walker, LLC wires Hunter Biden $60,091.24. Details can be found in the Second Bank Records Memorandum . 2016 January 20, 2016 Ukraine Vice President Biden meets with President Poroshenko in Switzerland at the World Economic Forum where Biden reinforced the linkage between the loan guarantee and the necessary reforms. February 4, 2016 Ukraine Mykola Zlochevsky gives Hunter Biden unspecified, extravagant birthday gifts. February 11, 2016 Ukraine Vice President Biden and President Poroshenko conduct a call. February 12, 2016 Romania Robinson Walker, LLC wires Hunter Biden’s Owasco P.C. $61,126.24. Details can be found in the Second Bank Records Memorandum. February 16, 2016 Ukraine President Poroshenko asks Prosecutor General Shokin to resign. February 18, 2016 Ukraine Vice President Biden calls President Poroshenko to thank him for calling on Prosecutor General Shokin to resign. February 19, 2016 Ukraine President Poroshenko says he recieved Prosecutor General Shokin’s letter of resignation. March 24, 2016 Romania Robinson Walker, LLC wires Owasco P.C. $61,816.05. Details can be found in the Second Bank Records Memorandum. March 29, 2016 Romania Hunter Biden meets again with U.S. Ambassador to Romania. March 29, 2016 Ukraine Ukranian Parliament approves President Poroshenko’s firing of Prosecutor General Shokin. May 23, 2016 Romania Robinson Walker, LLC wires Owasco P.C. $123,830.80. Details can be found in the Second Bank Records Memorandum. May 23, 2016 Romania Robinson Walker, LLC wires Owasco P.C. $53,419.74. Details can be found in the Second Bank Records Memorandum. July 11, 2016 Romania Robinson Walker, LLC wires Owasco P.C. $116,860.93. Details can be found in the Second Bank Records Memorandum. Load More Share via Email About Chairman James Comer Full Committee Rules Committee Activity Calendar Hearings Letters Markups Reports Forums Subcommittees Cybersecurity, Information Technology, and Government Innovation Economic Growth, Energy Policy, and Regulatory Affairs Government Operations Health Care and Financial Services Military and Foreign Affairs Federal Law Enforcement Delivering on Government Efficiency Task Force on the Declassification of Federal Secrets Media Center Press Releases The Overview Biden Family Investigation The Bidens’ Influence Peddling Timeline Biden's Border Crisis COVID Origins Blow the Whistle Minority © 2025 Committee on Oversight and Government Reform Privacy Policy 2157 Rayburn House Office Building Washington, DC 20515 Phone: (202) 225-5074 Fax: (202) 225-3974 Search About Chairman James Comer Full Committee Rules Committee Activity Calendar Hearings Letters Markups Reports Forums Subcommittees Cybersecurity, Information Technology, and Government Innovation Economic Growth, Energy Policy, and Regulatory Affairs Government Operations Health Care and Financial Services Military and Foreign Affairs Federal Law Enforcement Delivering on Government Efficiency Task Force on the Declassification of Federal Secrets Media Center Press Releases The Overview Biden Family Investigation The Bidens’ Influence Peddling Timeline Biden's Border Crisis COVID Origins Blow the WhistleHunter Biden: What was he doing in China and Ukraine? Skip to content British Broadcasting Corporation Home News Sport Business Innovation Culture Arts Travel Earth Audio Video Live Home News Israel-Gaza War War in Ukraine US & Canada UK UK Politics England N. Ireland N. Ireland Politics Scotland Scotland Politics Wales Wales Politics Africa Asia China India Australia Europe Latin America Middle East In Pictures BBC InDepth BBC Verify Sport Business Executive Lounge Technology of Business Future of Business Innovation Technology Science & Health Artificial Intelligence AI v the Mind Culture Film & TV Music Art & Design Style Books Entertainment News Arts Arts in Motion Travel Destinations Africa Antarctica Asia Australia and Pacific Caribbean & Bermuda Central America Europe Middle East North America South America World’s Table Culture & Experiences Adventures The SpeciaList Earth Natural Wonders Weather & Science Climate Solutions Sustainable Business Green Living Audio Podcasts Radio Audio FAQs Video Live Live News Live Sport Home News Sport Business Innovation Culture Arts Travel Earth Audio Video Live Weather Newsletters Hunter Biden: What was he doing in China and Ukraine? 6 April 2021 Share Save Share Save Getty Images Vice-President Biden in 2016 with his son Hunter looking on Hunter Biden, second son of US President Joe Biden, is being investigated by the Justice Department over his finances including, according to US media reports, some of his business dealings in China. During the 2020 election campaign, he and his father were frequently accused by Donald Trump and his associates of wrongdoing in regards to China and Ukraine, allegations which they both denied. The New York Post reported on an alleged email in which an adviser from a Ukrainian energy company, Burisma, apparently thanked Hunter for inviting him to meet his father, Joe Biden. Asked about the allegations, Joe Biden told a reporter it was a "smear campaign". No criminal activity has been proven, and no evidence has emerged that Mr Biden did anything to intentionally benefit his son. In an interview with the BBC months after his father was sworn in as president, Hunter Biden defended his qualifications for the position at Burisma but added that, in retrospect, he had "missed... the perception that I would create". Claims of influence-peddling are common in Washington DC and Mr Trump's children have also been accused of conflicts of interest in lucrative business deals overseas. They, too, deny wrongdoing. What do we know about the federal investigation? The Justice Department is investigating Hunter Biden's finances including scrutinising some of his past Chinese business dealings and other transactions, a "person familiar with the matter" told The Associated Press in December . The tax investigation was launched in 2018 but Hunter Biden said he had learned about it for the first time in December 2020. Asked about the investigation by US broadcaster CBS this April, the president's son said: "I'm co-operating, completely. And I'm absolutely certain, 100% certain, that at the end of the investigation, that I will be cleared of any wrongdoing." What have the Bidens been accused of in China? The New York Post cited a purported email from Hunter Biden in August 2017 indicating he was receiving a $10m annual fee from a Chinese billionaire for "introductions alone", though it is unclear who was involved in the alleged introductions. Another purported email, which Fox News said it had confirmed, reportedly refers to a deal pursued by Hunter involving China's largest private energy firm. It is said to include a cryptic mention of "10 held by H for the big guy". Fox News cited unnamed sources as saying "the big guy" in the purported email was a reference to Joe Biden. This message is said to be from May 2017. Both emails would date from when the former US vice-president was a private citizen. A former business associate of Hunter Biden has come forward to say he can confirm the allegations. Tony Bobulinski told Fox News that, contrary to Joe Biden's statements that he had nothing to do with his son's business affairs, Hunter had "frequently referenced asking him for his sign-off or advice on various potential deals" in China. Mr Bobulinski, who is reportedly a US Navy veteran, separately told Fox News' Tucker Carlson that he had met on two occasions with Joe Biden to discuss business deals with China, the first time in May 2017 when Barack Obama's former vice-president was a private citizen. He says he asked Joe Biden's brother, James, whether the family was concerned about possible scrutiny of the former vice-president's involvement in a potential business deal with a Chinese entity. Mr Bobulinski told Fox News that James Biden had replied: "Plausible deniability." Mr Bobulinski was invited by Mr Trump to be his guest at the final presidential debate in Nashville, Tennessee on 22 October. What is known about Hunter's dealings in China? In 2013, Hunter flew aboard Air Force Two with his father, who was then vice-president, on an official visit to Beijing, where the younger Biden met investment banker Jonathan Li. Hunter told the New Yorker he had just met Mr Li for "a cup of coffee", but 12 days after the trip a private equity fund, BHR Partners, was approved by the Chinese authorities. Mr Li was chief executive and Hunter was a board member. He would hold a 10% stake. Getty Images Joe Biden walks out of Air Force Two with his granddaughter and son, Hunter Biden BHR is backed by some of China's largest state banks and by local governments, according to US media. Hunter Biden's lawyer said he had joined the board in an unpaid position "based on his interest in seeking ways to bring Chinese capital to international markets". His lawyer also said his client did not acquire his financial stake in BHR until 2017, after his father had left office in the US. Hunter resigned from the board of BHR in April 2020, but still held his 10% stake in BHR as of July this year, according to the company report. What did the New York Post say about Hunter Biden and Ukraine? The New York Post reported an email from April 2015, in which an adviser to Burisma, Vadym Pozharskyi, apparently thanked Hunter Biden for inviting him to meet his father in Washington. Hunter was a director on the board of Burisma - a Ukrainian-owned private energy company while his father was the Obama administration's pointman on US-Ukrainian relations. Hunter was one of several foreigners on its board. The New York Post article did not provide evidence that the meeting had ever taken place. The Biden election campaign said there was no record of any such meeting on the former vice-president's "official schedule" from the time. But in a statement to Politico , the campaign also acknowledged that Mr Biden could have had an "informal interaction" with the Burisma adviser that did not appear on his official schedule, though it said any such encounter would have been "cursory". "Investigations by the press, during impeachment, and even by two Republican-led Senate committees whose work was decried as 'not legitimate' and political by a GOP colleague, have all reached the same conclusion: that Joe Biden carried out official US policy toward Ukraine and engaged in no wrongdoing," said Andrew Bates, a spokesman for Mr Biden. What we know about Biden-Ukraine corruption claims Mr Biden's team has also decried the New York Post story as "Russian disinformation", though it did not say the emails were bogus. The New York Post article was shared by President Trump and his allies. Two of his former advisers, Steve Bannon and Rudy Giuliani, were involved in providing the story and the hard drive containing the alleged emails, to the newspaper. Mr Giuliani says the messages were found on a laptop that Hunter dropped off at a Delaware repair shop in April 2019. Sceptics have noted that Mr Giuliani travelled in December 2019 to Kyiv where he met Ukrainian lawmaker Andriy Derkach, whom the US Treasury has designated as a longtime Kremlin agent. Mr Giuliani has acknowledged trying dig up dirt on the Bidens in Ukraine. But the US Director of National Intelligence, John Ratcliffe, told Fox Business that the purported emails were not connected to a Russian disinformation effort. Other US media say they have been unable to verify the authenticity of the emails. Hunter has neither confirmed nor denied that he dropped off a laptop at the location. Hunter joined Burisma in 2014, and remained on the board until April 2019, when he decided to leave. Speaking to the BBC, he said Burisma had seen his name "as gold" and that it had played a large part in his appointment to the board. Twitter and Facebook's action over Joe Biden article reignites bias claims What are the Bidens accused of in Ukraine? Donald Trump and his allies accused Joe Biden of wrongdoing because he had pushed, while vice-president, for the Ukrainian government to fire its top prosecutor, who was investigating the company for which Hunter worked. In 2016, Joe Biden called for the dismissal of Ukrainian prosecutor Viktor Shokin, whose office had Burisma and other companies under investigation. However, other Western leaders and major bodies that give financial support to Ukraine also wanted the prosecutor dismissed because they believed he was not active enough in tackling corruption. What else has the Biden campaign said? Shortly before the final presidential debate last year, the Democrat's camp released a statement denying wrongdoing. "Joe Biden has never even considered being involved in business with his family, nor in any overseas business whatsoever," said the statement. "He has never held stock in any such business arrangements nor has any family member or any other person ever held stock for him. "What is true is that Tony Bobulinski admitted on the record to Breitbart that he is angry that he was *not* able to go into business with Hunter and James Biden [Joe Biden's brother]." What did this have to do with impeachment? In 2019, details emerged of a phone call Mr Trump, the then president, had made to the president of Ukraine, in which he had urged the Ukrainian leader to investigate the Bidens. President Trump's impeachment explained This led to charges by the Democrats that Mr Trump was trying to illegally pressure Ukraine to help damage his election rival, resulting in impeachment by the House of Representatives. Mr Trump denied he had done anything wrong, and he was later acquitted by the Republican-controlled US Senate. Getty Images President Trump holds a copy of The Washington Post the day after the US Senate acquitted him on two articles of impeachment Has anything been proven against the Bidens? While no criminal activity has been proven, it has raised questions about potential conflicts of interest. A senior State Department official raised such concerns as far back as 2015. Joe Biden's son defends foreign dealings US Republican lawmakers launched an investigation and found last year that Hunter's work for the Ukrainian firm had been "problematic" - but there wasn't evidence that US foreign policy was influenced by it. No criminal charges were proven against Burisma either. The company issued a statement in 2017 saying "all legal proceedings and pending criminal allegations" against it were closed. Last year, Yuriy Lutsenko, the prosecutor in Ukraine who succeeded Viktor Shokin, told the BBC that there was no reason to investigate the Bidens under Ukrainian law. There is nothing illegal about sitting on a board of a company whilst family members serve in government. Hunter Biden's lawyers said in statement in October 2019 that he had undertaken "these business activities independently. He did not believe it appropriate to discuss them with his father, nor did he." Hunter told the New Yorker magazine that on the only occasion he had mentioned Burisma: "Dad said, 'I hope you know what you are doing.'" Amid all the scrutiny, Joe Biden promised last year that if he was elected president, no-one in his family would hold a job or have a business relationship with a foreign corporation or foreign government. Impeachment of Donald Trump US election 2020 BBC Verify Hunter Biden Joe Biden Related Jeremy Bowen: Trump-Zelensky row signals looming crisis between Europe and US 1 Mar 2025 World 'The boss' featured at Trump hush-money trial 25 Apr 2024 US & Canada How did US impeachments go from rare to routine? 28 Sep 2023 US & Canada More 21 hrs ago Trump's former VP Mike Pence receives JFK Courage Award Pence defied calls by Donald Trump to overturn the result of the 2020 election, and was shunned by Republicans as a result. 21 hrs ago US & Canada 25 Apr 2025 What would it mean for Ukraine to temporarily give up land? As Ukraine reckons with the terms of a possible peace deal, BBC Verify asks what it could mean in practice. 25 Apr 2025 BBC Verify 16 Apr 2025 Watch: Biden attacks Trump in first speech since leaving White House The former US president says his successor has "done so much damage and so much destruction" in his first days in office. 16 Apr 2025 US & Canada 16 Apr 2025 Biden attacks Trump in first speech since leaving White House The ex-president uses the speech to criticise the Trump administration's cuts to the welfare agency. 16 Apr 2025 US & Canada 15 Apr 2025 Trump blames Zelensky for starting war after massive Russian attack The US president apportioned blame to Ukraine's leader hours after the deadliest strike on civilians this year. 15 Apr 2025 World British Broadcasting Corporation Home News Sport Business Innovation Culture Arts Travel Earth Audio Video Live Weather BBC Shop BritBox BBC in other languages Follow BBC on: Terms of Use About the BBC Privacy Policy Cookies Accessibility Help Contact the BBC Advertise with us Do not share or sell my info Contact technical support Copyright 2025 BBC. All rights reserved. The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites. Read about our approach to external linking.Hunter Biden: What was he doing in China and Ukraine? Skip to content British Broadcasting Corporation Home News Sport Business Innovation Culture Arts Travel Earth Audio Video Live Home News Israel-Gaza War War in Ukraine US & Canada UK UK Politics England N. Ireland N. Ireland Politics Scotland Scotland Politics Wales Wales Politics Africa Asia China India Australia Europe Latin America Middle East In Pictures BBC InDepth BBC Verify Sport Business Executive Lounge Technology of Business Future of Business Innovation Technology Science & Health Artificial Intelligence AI v the Mind Culture Film & TV Music Art & Design Style Books Entertainment News Arts Arts in Motion Travel Destinations Africa Antarctica Asia Australia and Pacific Caribbean & Bermuda Central America Europe Middle East North America South America World’s Table Culture & Experiences Adventures The SpeciaList Earth Natural Wonders Weather & Science Climate Solutions Sustainable Business Green Living Audio Podcasts Radio Audio FAQs Video Live Live News Live Sport Home News Sport Business Innovation Culture Arts Travel Earth Audio Video Live Weather Newsletters Hunter Biden: What was he doing in China and Ukraine? 6 April 2021 Share Save Share Save Getty Images Vice-President Biden in 2016 with his son Hunter looking on Hunter Biden, second son of US President Joe Biden, is being investigated by the Justice Department over his finances including, according to US media reports, some of his business dealings in China. During the 2020 election campaign, he and his father were frequently accused by Donald Trump and his associates of wrongdoing in regards to China and Ukraine, allegations which they both denied. The New York Post reported on an alleged email in which an adviser from a Ukrainian energy company, Burisma, apparently thanked Hunter for inviting him to meet his father, Joe Biden. Asked about the allegations, Joe Biden told a reporter it was a "smear campaign". No criminal activity has been proven, and no evidence has emerged that Mr Biden did anything to intentionally benefit his son. In an interview with the BBC months after his father was sworn in as president, Hunter Biden defended his qualifications for the position at Burisma but added that, in retrospect, he had "missed... the perception that I would create". Claims of influence-peddling are common in Washington DC and Mr Trump's children have also been accused of conflicts of interest in lucrative business deals overseas. They, too, deny wrongdoing. What do we know about the federal investigation? The Justice Department is investigating Hunter Biden's finances including scrutinising some of his past Chinese business dealings and other transactions, a "person familiar with the matter" told The Associated Press in December . The tax investigation was launched in 2018 but Hunter Biden said he had learned about it for the first time in December 2020. Asked about the investigation by US broadcaster CBS this April, the president's son said: "I'm co-operating, completely. And I'm absolutely certain, 100% certain, that at the end of the investigation, that I will be cleared of any wrongdoing." What have the Bidens been accused of in China? The New York Post cited a purported email from Hunter Biden in August 2017 indicating he was receiving a $10m annual fee from a Chinese billionaire for "introductions alone", though it is unclear who was involved in the alleged introductions. Another purported email, which Fox News said it had confirmed, reportedly refers to a deal pursued by Hunter involving China's largest private energy firm. It is said to include a cryptic mention of "10 held by H for the big guy". Fox News cited unnamed sources as saying "the big guy" in the purported email was a reference to Joe Biden. This message is said to be from May 2017. Both emails would date from when the former US vice-president was a private citizen. A former business associate of Hunter Biden has come forward to say he can confirm the allegations. Tony Bobulinski told Fox News that, contrary to Joe Biden's statements that he had nothing to do with his son's business affairs, Hunter had "frequently referenced asking him for his sign-off or advice on various potential deals" in China. Mr Bobulinski, who is reportedly a US Navy veteran, separately told Fox News' Tucker Carlson that he had met on two occasions with Joe Biden to discuss business deals with China, the first time in May 2017 when Barack Obama's former vice-president was a private citizen. He says he asked Joe Biden's brother, James, whether the family was concerned about possible scrutiny of the former vice-president's involvement in a potential business deal with a Chinese entity. Mr Bobulinski told Fox News that James Biden had replied: "Plausible deniability." Mr Bobulinski was invited by Mr Trump to be his guest at the final presidential debate in Nashville, Tennessee on 22 October. What is known about Hunter's dealings in China? In 2013, Hunter flew aboard Air Force Two with his father, who was then vice-president, on an official visit to Beijing, where the younger Biden met investment banker Jonathan Li. Hunter told the New Yorker he had just met Mr Li for "a cup of coffee", but 12 days after the trip a private equity fund, BHR Partners, was approved by the Chinese authorities. Mr Li was chief executive and Hunter was a board member. He would hold a 10% stake. Getty Images Joe Biden walks out of Air Force Two with his granddaughter and son, Hunter Biden BHR is backed by some of China's largest state banks and by local governments, according to US media. Hunter Biden's lawyer said he had joined the board in an unpaid position "based on his interest in seeking ways to bring Chinese capital to international markets". His lawyer also said his client did not acquire his financial stake in BHR until 2017, after his father had left office in the US. Hunter resigned from the board of BHR in April 2020, but still held his 10% stake in BHR as of July this year, according to the company report. What did the New York Post say about Hunter Biden and Ukraine? The New York Post reported an email from April 2015, in which an adviser to Burisma, Vadym Pozharskyi, apparently thanked Hunter Biden for inviting him to meet his father in Washington. Hunter was a director on the board of Burisma - a Ukrainian-owned private energy company while his father was the Obama administration's pointman on US-Ukrainian relations. Hunter was one of several foreigners on its board. The New York Post article did not provide evidence that the meeting had ever taken place. The Biden election campaign said there was no record of any such meeting on the former vice-president's "official schedule" from the time. But in a statement to Politico , the campaign also acknowledged that Mr Biden could have had an "informal interaction" with the Burisma adviser that did not appear on his official schedule, though it said any such encounter would have been "cursory". "Investigations by the press, during impeachment, and even by two Republican-led Senate committees whose work was decried as 'not legitimate' and political by a GOP colleague, have all reached the same conclusion: that Joe Biden carried out official US policy toward Ukraine and engaged in no wrongdoing," said Andrew Bates, a spokesman for Mr Biden. What we know about Biden-Ukraine corruption claims Mr Biden's team has also decried the New York Post story as "Russian disinformation", though it did not say the emails were bogus. The New York Post article was shared by President Trump and his allies. Two of his former advisers, Steve Bannon and Rudy Giuliani, were involved in providing the story and the hard drive containing the alleged emails, to the newspaper. Mr Giuliani says the messages were found on a laptop that Hunter dropped off at a Delaware repair shop in April 2019. Sceptics have noted that Mr Giuliani travelled in December 2019 to Kyiv where he met Ukrainian lawmaker Andriy Derkach, whom the US Treasury has designated as a longtime Kremlin agent. Mr Giuliani has acknowledged trying dig up dirt on the Bidens in Ukraine. But the US Director of National Intelligence, John Ratcliffe, told Fox Business that the purported emails were not connected to a Russian disinformation effort. Other US media say they have been unable to verify the authenticity of the emails. Hunter has neither confirmed nor denied that he dropped off a laptop at the location. Hunter joined Burisma in 2014, and remained on the board until April 2019, when he decided to leave. Speaking to the BBC, he said Burisma had seen his name "as gold" and that it had played a large part in his appointment to the board. Twitter and Facebook's action over Joe Biden article reignites bias claims What are the Bidens accused of in Ukraine? Donald Trump and his allies accused Joe Biden of wrongdoing because he had pushed, while vice-president, for the Ukrainian government to fire its top prosecutor, who was investigating the company for which Hunter worked. In 2016, Joe Biden called for the dismissal of Ukrainian prosecutor Viktor Shokin, whose office had Burisma and other companies under investigation. However, other Western leaders and major bodies that give financial support to Ukraine also wanted the prosecutor dismissed because they believed he was not active enough in tackling corruption. What else has the Biden campaign said? Shortly before the final presidential debate last year, the Democrat's camp released a statement denying wrongdoing. "Joe Biden has never even considered being involved in business with his family, nor in any overseas business whatsoever," said the statement. "He has never held stock in any such business arrangements nor has any family member or any other person ever held stock for him. "What is true is that Tony Bobulinski admitted on the record to Breitbart that he is angry that he was *not* able to go into business with Hunter and James Biden [Joe Biden's brother]." What did this have to do with impeachment? In 2019, details emerged of a phone call Mr Trump, the then president, had made to the president of Ukraine, in which he had urged the Ukrainian leader to investigate the Bidens. President Trump's impeachment explained This led to charges by the Democrats that Mr Trump was trying to illegally pressure Ukraine to help damage his election rival, resulting in impeachment by the House of Representatives. Mr Trump denied he had done anything wrong, and he was later acquitted by the Republican-controlled US Senate. Getty Images President Trump holds a copy of The Washington Post the day after the US Senate acquitted him on two articles of impeachment Has anything been proven against the Bidens? While no criminal activity has been proven, it has raised questions about potential conflicts of interest. A senior State Department official raised such concerns as far back as 2015. Joe Biden's son defends foreign dealings US Republican lawmakers launched an investigation and found last year that Hunter's work for the Ukrainian firm had been "problematic" - but there wasn't evidence that US foreign policy was influenced by it. No criminal charges were proven against Burisma either. The company issued a statement in 2017 saying "all legal proceedings and pending criminal allegations" against it were closed. Last year, Yuriy Lutsenko, the prosecutor in Ukraine who succeeded Viktor Shokin, told the BBC that there was no reason to investigate the Bidens under Ukrainian law. There is nothing illegal about sitting on a board of a company whilst family members serve in government. Hunter Biden's lawyers said in statement in October 2019 that he had undertaken "these business activities independently. He did not believe it appropriate to discuss them with his father, nor did he." Hunter told the New Yorker magazine that on the only occasion he had mentioned Burisma: "Dad said, 'I hope you know what you are doing.'" Amid all the scrutiny, Joe Biden promised last year that if he was elected president, no-one in his family would hold a job or have a business relationship with a foreign corporation or foreign government. Impeachment of Donald Trump US election 2020 BBC Verify Hunter Biden Joe Biden Related Jeremy Bowen: Trump-Zelensky row signals looming crisis between Europe and US 1 Mar 2025 World 'The boss' featured at Trump hush-money trial 25 Apr 2024 US & Canada How did US impeachments go from rare to routine? 28 Sep 2023 US & Canada More 21 hrs ago Trump's former VP Mike Pence receives JFK Courage Award Pence defied calls by Donald Trump to overturn the result of the 2020 election, and was shunned by Republicans as a result. 21 hrs ago US & Canada 25 Apr 2025 What would it mean for Ukraine to temporarily give up land? As Ukraine reckons with the terms of a possible peace deal, BBC Verify asks what it could mean in practice. 25 Apr 2025 BBC Verify 16 Apr 2025 Watch: Biden attacks Trump in first speech since leaving White House The former US president says his successor has "done so much damage and so much destruction" in his first days in office. 16 Apr 2025 US & Canada 16 Apr 2025 Biden attacks Trump in first speech since leaving White House The ex-president uses the speech to criticise the Trump administration's cuts to the welfare agency. 16 Apr 2025 US & Canada 15 Apr 2025 Trump blames Zelensky for starting war after massive Russian attack The US president apportioned blame to Ukraine's leader hours after the deadliest strike on civilians this year. 15 Apr 2025 World British Broadcasting Corporation Home News Sport Business Innovation Culture Arts Travel Earth Audio Video Live Weather BBC Shop BritBox BBC in other languages Follow BBC on: Terms of Use About the BBC Privacy Policy Cookies Accessibility Help Contact the BBC Advertise with us Do not share or sell my info Contact technical support Copyright 2025 BBC. All rights reserved. The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites. Read about our approach to external linking.The Bidens’ Influence Peddling Timeline - United States House Committee on Oversight and Accountability Skip to main content Toggle navigation Search About Chairman James Comer Full Committee Rules Committee Activity Calendar Hearings Letters Markups Reports Forums Subcommittees Cybersecurity, Information Technology, and Government Innovation Economic Growth, Energy Policy, and Regulatory Affairs Government Operations Health Care and Financial Services Military and Foreign Affairs Federal Law Enforcement Delivering on Government Efficiency Task Force on the Declassification of Federal Secrets Media Center Press Releases The Overview Biden Family Investigation The Bidens’ Influence Peddling Timeline Biden's Border Crisis COVID Origins Blow the Whistle The Bidens’ Influence Peddling Timeline Since taking the gavel in January, the Committee on Oversight and Accountability has accelerated its investigation of the Biden family’s domestic and international business practices to determine whether the Biden family has been targeted by foreign actors, President Biden is compromised, and our national security is threatened. Records obtained through the Committee’s subpoenas to date reveal that the Bidens and their associates have received over $20 million in payments from foreign entities. Below is a timeline that details key dates in our investigation. The main points of interest are: 1) Romania: On September 28, 2015, Vice President Biden welcomed Romanian President Klaus Iohannis to the White House. Within five weeks of this meeting, a Romanian businessman involved with a high-profile corruption prosecution in Romania, Gabriel Popoviciu, began depositing a Biden associate’s bank account, which ultimately made their way into Biden family accounts. Popoviciu made sixteen of the seventeen payments, totaling over $3 million, to the Biden associate account while Joe Biden was Vice President. Biden family accounts ultimately received approximately $1.038 million. The total amount from Romania to the Biden family and their associates is over $3 million. 2) China- CEFC: On March 1, 2017—less than two months after Vice President Joe Biden left public office—State Energy HK Limited, a Chinese company, wired $3 million to a Biden associate’s account. This is the same bank account used in the above “Romania” section. After the Chinese company wired the Biden associate account the $3 million, the Biden family received approximately $1,065,692 over a three-month period in different bank accounts. Additionally, the CEFC Chairman gives Hunter Biden a diamond worth $80,000. Lastly, CEFC creates a joint venture with the Bidens in the summer of 2017. The timeline lays out the “WhatsApp” messages and subsequent wires from the Chinese to the Bidens of $100,000 and $5 million. The total amount from China, specifically with CEFC and their related entities, to the Biden family and their associates is over $8 million. 3) Kazakhstan: On April 22, 2014, Kenes Rakishev, a Kazakhstani oligarch used his Singaporean entity, Novatus Holdings, to wire one of Hunter Biden’s Rosemont Seneca entities $142,300. The very next day—April 23, 2014—the Rosemont Seneca entity transferred the exact same amount of money to a car dealership for a car for Hunter Biden. Hunter Biden and Devon Archer would represent Burisma in Kazakhstan in May/June of 2014 as the company attempted to broker a three-way deal among Burisma, the Kazakhstan government, and a Chinese state-owned energy company. 4) Ukraine: Devon Archer joined the Burisma board of directors in spring of 2014 and was joined by Hunter Biden shortly thereafter. Hunter Biden joined the company as counsel, but after a meeting with Burisma owner Mykola Zlochevsky in Lake Como, Italy, was elevated to the board of directors in the spring of 2014. Both Biden and Archer were each paid $1 million per year for their positions on the board of directors. In December 2015, after a Burisma board of directors meeting, Zlochevsky and Hunter Biden “called D.C.” in the wake of mounting pressures the company was facing. Zlochevsky was later charged with bribing Ukrainian officials with $6 million in an attempt to delay or drop the investigation into his company. The total amount from Ukraine to the Biden family and their associates is $6.5 million. 5) Russia: On February 14, 2014, a Russian oligarch and Russia’s richest woman, Yelena Baturina, wired a Rosemont Seneca entity $3.5 million. On March 11, 2014, the wire was split up: $750,000 was transferred to Devon Archer, and the remainder was sent to Rosemont Seneca Bohai, a company Devon Archer and Hunter Biden split equally. In spring of 2014, Yelena Baturina joined Hunter Biden and Devon Archer to share a meal with then-Vice President Biden at a restaurant in Washington, D.C. The total amount from Russia to the Biden family and their associates is $3.5 million. Beyond this timeline, here are links to our First , Second , Third , and Fourth Bank Memorandums that provide detailed descriptions and show actual bank records and wires. Biden Family Timeline China – BHR China- CEFC Hunter Biden Criminal Investigation Kazakhstan Romania Russia Ukraine 2009 January 20, 2009 Important Date Obama-Biden Administration begins. 2013 November 1, 2013 China – BHR Hunter Biden, business associate, and Chinese investors agree to create Bohai Harvest RST Equity Investment Fund Management Co., Ltd. (BHR), an investment fund controlled by the Bank of China, to focus on mergers and acquisitions, and investment in and reforms of state-owned enterprise. December 4, 2013 China – BHR Vice President Biden travels with Hunter Biden on Air Force 2 to China and meets CEO of BHR, Jonathan Li. Shortly thereafter, BHR’s business license was approved and Hunter Biden was a board member. 2014 February 5, 2014 Kazakhstan Hunter Biden met Kazakhstani oligarch Kenes Rakishev at the Hay Adams Hotel in Washington, D.C. In email correspondences with Devon Archer surrounding the meeting, Rakishev requested Secretary of State John Kerry visit Kazakhstan. Archer replied, “if we have some business started as planned I will ensure its planned soonest.” Rakishev is a Kazakhstani oligarch and millionaire and was a director at Kazakhstan’s state-owned oil company KazMunayGas. Rakishev maintained close ties to Karim Massimov, who became prime minister on April 2, 2014. February 14, 2014 Russia Russian oligarch Yelena Baturina – the wealthiest woman in Russia and then married to the former mayor of Moscow—wired the Rosemont Seneca Thornton bank account $3.5 million. Rosemont Seneca Thornton’s beneficiary was Rosemont Seneca Partners, of which Hunter Biden was the chairman. March 11, 2014 Russia Rosemont Seneca Thornton transferred $2,752,711 to a Rosemont Seneca Bohai bank account. Also on March 11, 2014, $750,000 of the original wire from Baturina was sent to Devon Archer from Rosemont Seneca Thornton. Rosemont Seneca Bohai was an entity used by both Hunter Biden and Devon Archer. In his testimony to the Committee, Archer confirmed that he and Hunter Biden were 50-50 owners in Rosemont Seneca Bohai. Rosemont Seneca Bohai was opened in Delaware on February 13, 2014—the day before the $3.5 million wire from Yelena Baturina. The bank records can be found in the third bank records memo. April 1, 2014 Russia and Kazakhstan In the spring of 2014, after Yelena Baturina sent the $3.5 million wire to Rosemont Seneca Thornton and around the same time that Kenes Rakishev wired money to Rosemont Seneca Bohai for Hunter Biden’s sportscar, Vice President Biden attended dinner with Yelena Baturina, Kenes Rakishev, Karim Massimov, Hunter Biden, Devon Archer, and others at Café Milano in Washington, D.C. Joe Biden stayed for dinner. Devon Archer provided this information during his transcribed interview . April 15, 2014 Ukraine Burisma, a Ukrainian energy company, appoints Biden business associate to their board of directors. April 22, 2014 Kazakhstan Kenes Rakishev’s Singaporean company wires $142,300 through his Latvian company to a Rosemont entity. The details can be found in the third bank records memorandum . April 22, 2014 Ukraine Vice President Biden travels to Ukraine and gives an anti-corruption speech. April 23, 2014 Kazakhstan The Rosemont entity wires $142,300 to a car dealership in New Jersey for a new sports car for Hunter Biden. The details can be found in the third bank records memorandum . May 12, 2014 Ukraine Burisma announces Hunter Biden joined its board of directors. May 21, 2014 Romania Vice President Biden visits Romania and delivers a speech to the Romanian Prime Minister, judges, prosecutors, and leaders of the Romanian Parliament. September 12, 2014 China – BHR BHR invests $1.7 billion in CCP-linked petroleum and chemical company. December 9, 2014 China – BHR Hunter Biden and business associate invest $484,920 into BHR. December 22, 2014 Kazakhstan Kenes Rakishev’s Kazakhstani oil company and Burisma join with a CCP-linked company and announce a transnational financial arrangement. 2015 April 16, 2015 Ukraine and Kazakhstan On April 16, 2015, Vice President Joe Biden attended a dinner with Karim Massimov, Vadym Pozharsky, Hunter Biden, Devon Archer, and others at Café Milano in Washington, D.C. Devon Archer provided this information during his transcribed interview . September 15, 2015 China – BHR BHR joins with a CCP-linked entity to acquire US-based Henniges Automotive in a deal reportedly worth $600 million. September 28, 2015 Romania Vice President Biden welcomes Romanian President Klaus Iohannis to the White House. A readout of the meeting states, the “Vice President welcomed President Iohannis’ focus on anti-corruption efforts and rule of law as a means to strengthen national security and promote greater investment and economic growth.” President Iohannis said the Vice President “voiced satisfaction over Romania’s progress with the fight against corruption.” November 2, 2015 Ukraine Vadym Pozharskyi suggests high level U.S. level officials come to Ukraine and talk with Prosecutor General Viktor Shokin and President Petro Poroshenko about Mykola Zlochevsky’s investigations. Prosecutor General Shokin was investigating Burisma and Burisma’s owner, Zlochevsky for fraud. Prosecutor General Shokin is the Ukranian government official Vice President Biden demanded Poroshenko fire. November 5, 2015 Romania Romanian businessman, Gabriel Popoviciu, begins making deposits into Robinson Walker, LLC’s bank account. Robinson Walker, LLC is an entity owned by a Biden associate, Rob Walker. Popoviciu’s company sent Robinson Walker the first wire for $179,836.86. From November 2015 to May 2017, Popoviciu’s company paid Robinson Walker, LLC over $3 million. Biden family accounts received approximately $1.038 million from the Robinson Walker, LLC account after Popoviciu’s deposits. Sixteen of the seventeen payments from Popoviciu’s company to Robinson Walker, LLC were made while Joe Biden was Vice President. Details can be found in the Second Bank Records Memorandum . November 6, 2015 Ukraine Amos Hochstein, a high level U.S. government offical working in the Obama-Biden Administration, meets with Hunter Biden and discusses Burisma. November 9, 2015 Romania Rob Walker’s account wires Hunter Biden $59,900. Details can be found in the Second Bank Records Memorandum. November 11, 2015 Ukraine Amos Hochstein meets with Vice President Biden in the West Wing. November 12, 2015 Ukraine Amos Hochstein calls Hunter Biden. November 13, 2015 Romania Hunter Biden meets with the U.S. Ambassador to Romania. November 13, 2015 Ukraine VP Biden touched down in Ukraine last night. Read his initial notes from the road: https://t.co/FdPysDjiqT pic.twitter.com/ybZFp7frYe — VP Biden (Archived) (@VP44) December 7, 2015 Vice President Biden announces trip to Ukraine to take place the first week of December 2015. November 14, 2015 Ukraine Vadym Pozharskyi emails Hunter Biden confirmation that the Vice President will be traveling to Ukraine. November 14, 2015 Romania Hunter Biden meets with the Ambassador of Romania to the United States. November 15, 2015 Romania Hunter Biden travels to Romania. December 4, 2015 Ukraine Mykola Zlochevsky and Vadym Pozharsky complain about constant “government pressures” and urge Hunter Biden to call the Vice President of the United States, Joe Biden. Devon Archer testified that Hunter Biden, Zlochevsky, and Pozharsky “called D.C.” Devon Archer provided this information during his transcribed interview . December 7, 2015 China – CEFC Hunter Biden and CEFC Chairman Ye Jianming begin communicating regarding a possible U.S. partnership. December 7, 2015 Romania Robinson Walker, LLC wires Hunter Biden $59,725. Details can be found in the Second Bank Records Memorandum. December 7, 2015 Ukraine https://oversight.house.gov/wp-content/uploads/2023/07/Biden-Firing-Ukraine-Prosecutor-Clip.mp4 Vice President Biden arrives in Ukraine, where he demands Prosecutor General Shokin be fired if Ukraine wants $1 billion in International Monetary Fund (IMF) loans. December 9, 2015 Ukraine Vice President Biden departs Ukraine and gets a commitment from President Poroshenko that Prosecutor General Shokin will be fired. December 17, 2015 Ukraine Vice President Biden hosts a holiday party at the Vice Presidential residence, which Amos Hochstein and Hunter Biden both attend. December 23, 2015 Romania Robinson Walker, LLC wires Hunter Biden $60,091.24. Details can be found in the Second Bank Records Memorandum . 2016 January 20, 2016 Ukraine Vice President Biden meets with President Poroshenko in Switzerland at the World Economic Forum where Biden reinforced the linkage between the loan guarantee and the necessary reforms. February 4, 2016 Ukraine Mykola Zlochevsky gives Hunter Biden unspecified, extravagant birthday gifts. February 11, 2016 Ukraine Vice President Biden and President Poroshenko conduct a call. February 12, 2016 Romania Robinson Walker, LLC wires Hunter Biden’s Owasco P.C. $61,126.24. Details can be found in the Second Bank Records Memorandum. February 16, 2016 Ukraine President Poroshenko asks Prosecutor General Shokin to resign. February 18, 2016 Ukraine Vice President Biden calls President Poroshenko to thank him for calling on Prosecutor General Shokin to resign. February 19, 2016 Ukraine President Poroshenko says he recieved Prosecutor General Shokin’s letter of resignation. March 24, 2016 Romania Robinson Walker, LLC wires Owasco P.C. $61,816.05. Details can be found in the Second Bank Records Memorandum. March 29, 2016 Romania Hunter Biden meets again with U.S. Ambassador to Romania. March 29, 2016 Ukraine Ukranian Parliament approves President Poroshenko’s firing of Prosecutor General Shokin. May 23, 2016 Romania Robinson Walker, LLC wires Owasco P.C. $123,830.80. Details can be found in the Second Bank Records Memorandum. May 23, 2016 Romania Robinson Walker, LLC wires Owasco P.C. $53,419.74. Details can be found in the Second Bank Records Memorandum. July 11, 2016 Romania Robinson Walker, LLC wires Owasco P.C. $116,860.93. Details can be found in the Second Bank Records Memorandum. Load More Share via Email About Chairman James Comer Full Committee Rules Committee Activity Calendar Hearings Letters Markups Reports Forums Subcommittees Cybersecurity, Information Technology, and Government Innovation Economic Growth, Energy Policy, and Regulatory Affairs Government Operations Health Care and Financial Services Military and Foreign Affairs Federal Law Enforcement Delivering on Government Efficiency Task Force on the Declassification of Federal Secrets Media Center Press Releases The Overview Biden Family Investigation The Bidens’ Influence Peddling Timeline Biden's Border Crisis COVID Origins Blow the Whistle Minority © 2025 Committee on Oversight and Government Reform Privacy Policy 2157 Rayburn House Office Building Washington, DC 20515 Phone: (202) 225-5074 Fax: (202) 225-3974 Search About Chairman James Comer Full Committee Rules Committee Activity Calendar Hearings Letters Markups Reports Forums Subcommittees Cybersecurity, Information Technology, and Government Innovation Economic Growth, Energy Policy, and Regulatory Affairs Government Operations Health Care and Financial Services Military and Foreign Affairs Federal Law Enforcement Delivering on Government Efficiency Task Force on the Declassification of Federal Secrets Media Center Press Releases The Overview Biden Family Investigation The Bidens’ Influence Peddling Timeline Biden's Border Crisis COVID Origins Blow the WhistlePresident Donald J. Trump Achieved the Biggest Tax Cuts and Reforms in American History – The White House Skip to content This is historical material “frozen in time”. The website is no longer updated and links to external websites and some internal pages may not work. Open Menu WhiteHouse.gov WhiteHouse.gov Copy URL to your clipboard Share Economy National Security Budget Immigration Energy Search WhiteHouse.gov Open Search Fact Sheets President Donald J. Trump Achieved the Biggest Tax Cuts and Reforms in American History Budget & Spending Issued on: February 5, 2018 Share: Share on Facebook Share on Twitter Copy URL to your clipboard All News Quote And just as I promised the American people from this podium 11 months ago, we enacted the biggest tax cuts and reforms in American history. Our massive tax cuts provide tremendous relief for the middle class and small business. President Donald J. Trump BIGGEST TAX CUTS AND REFORMS: Because of President Donald J. Trump, Americans will benefit from the biggest tax cuts and reforms in American history. President Trump’s tax cuts are the biggest gross tax cuts in American history, cutting over $5.5 trillion in taxes over ten years. The President’s tax law included substantial reforms to make taxes simpler and fairer, which helped offset the cost of the tax cuts and thereby limit the net tax cut to $1.5 trillion. President Trump cut the corporate tax rate from 35 percent to 21 percent, the largest percentage point reduction of the top marginal rate in history. President Trump’s tax cuts include the biggest increase in the child tax credit in history. The Child Tax Credit was increased by $573.4 billion over ten years, larger than any previous change to credits specifically targeting families. President Trump’s tax cuts included some of the most substantial reforms to the tax code in American history. The Tax Cuts and Jobs Act will help end the offshoring of corporate money by transitioning the country to a territorial system of corporate taxation and creating anti-abuse rules for multinationals that artificially shift profits offshore. The Tax Cuts and Jobs Act nearly doubles the standard deduction, to simplify tax filing. The Tax Cuts and Jobs Act limits itemized deductions, while maintaining the most popular deductions, such as the mortgage interest deduction and charitable giving deduction. The Tax Cuts and Jobs Act facilitates school choice by allowing families to use 529 college savings plans for elementary and secondary education expense and spend up to $10,000 annually on private school tuition and related expenses, in addition to the uses previously allowed. The first new community development tax incentive program enacted since the Clinton administration, providing an opportunity for mainstream private investors to support businesses and distressed communities with the creation of Opportunity Zones. The Tax Cuts and Jobs Act repeals the individual mandate, marking the single largest legislative blow to Obamacare since the law was passed. This individual mandate is particularly painful for low and middle-income Americans: 79 percent of people who paid the penalty in 2016 had household income below $50,000. The tax law’s repeal of the individual mandate relieves Americans from the unprecedented assault on liberty, where the Federal Government fined Americans for not purchasing something. As a combination of tax cuts and tax reform, the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act was therefore the biggest legislative action reforming our tax code in history. AMERICAN COMPANIES ARE DELIVERING: Businesses throughout the country are responding to President Trump’s tax cuts by rewarding American workers. Since President Trump provided his historic tax cuts and reforms, more than 3.5 million American workers across more than 300 companies have received bonuses, raises, and increased. Many companies have also announced new investments and new hiring. Best Buy has announced it is giving a $1,000 bonus to full-time employees and a $500 bonus to part-time employees, in addition to investing $20 million to expand technology development centers across the United States. Quest Diagnostics is giving a bonus of up to $500 to nearly 40,000 employees and investing $75 million of its tax savings back into the company and employees. Discover announced it would raise its minimum wage to $15.25 an hour and had paid a $1,000 bonus to more than 15,000 non-executive employees. Hostess Brands is providing employees with a $750 cash bonus and $500 contribution to their 401(k) accounts, in addition to providing a year’s worth of free Hostess products. Cigna announced that it was increasing its minimum wage in the United States to $16 an hour and adding $30 million to its 401(k) program to match additional contributions, benefitting more than 30,000 employees. Lowe’s announced it was giving a bonus of up to $1,000 to employees and expanding its benefits package for full-time workers to include 10 weeks of maternity leave, two weeks of parental leave, and adoption assistance. BUILDING ON OUR ECONOMIC MOMENTUM: President Trump’s tax cuts are expanding on a strong economy that continues to benefit American workers. Average hourly wages increased by 2.9 percent last year, the largest increase in 8 years. 200,000 jobs were added in January, while the unemployment rate remained at its lowest level in 17 years, 4.1 percent. Manufacturing expanded in January at near the fastest pace since 2004, according to the Institute for Supply Management data. Recent polling shows Americans are satisfied with the state of the U.S. economy, with the percentage of those polled with positive views of the economy at a 17-year high. Consumer optimism increased in January according to The Conference Board’s Consumer Confidence Survey. Consumers are confident that the strong pace of growth seen in late 2017 will continue in 2018. According to the UBS Investor Watch Quarterly, which surveys business owner sentiment, optimism has soared since the passage of tax reform. UBS found that positive economic outlook among business owners has grown by 18 percentage points between quarter four of 2017 and quarter one of 2018. UBS found that 79 percent of the businesses owners surveyed were satisfied with the tax bill and 72 percent believed it would boost the economy. WhiteHouse.gov The White House Twitter Facebook Instagram YouTube President Donald J. Trump Vice President Mike Pence First Lady Melania Trump Mrs. Karen Pence The Cabinet Administration Accomplishments News Remarks Articles Presidential Actions Briefings & Statements About The White House Economy & Jobs Budget & Spending Education Immigration National Security & Defense Healthcare Council of Economic Advisers Council of Environmental Quality National Security Council Office of Management and Budget Office of National Drug Control Policy Office of Science and Technology Policy Copyright Privacy Policy Menu News Remarks Briefings & Statements Presidential Actions Articles All News Issues Education National Security & Defense Budget & Spending Immigration Healthcare All Issues The Administration President Donald J. Trump Vice President Michael R. Pence First Lady Melania Trump Second Lady Karen Pence The Cabinet Disclosures Executive Offices Council of Economic Advisers Council on Environmental Quality National Security Council Office of Management and Budget Office of National Drug Control Policy Office of Science and Technology Policy About The White House White House Tours Past Presidents Past First Ladies The Grounds Our Government Get Involved Write or Call the White House White House Internship Program White House Fellows Contact Live Search Type Your Search Press enter to searchPresident Donald J. Trump Achieved the Biggest Tax Cuts and Reforms in American History – The White House Skip to content This is historical material “frozen in time”. The website is no longer updated and links to external websites and some internal pages may not work. Open Menu WhiteHouse.gov WhiteHouse.gov Copy URL to your clipboard Share Economy National Security Budget Immigration Energy Search WhiteHouse.gov Open Search Fact Sheets President Donald J. Trump Achieved the Biggest Tax Cuts and Reforms in American History Budget & Spending Issued on: February 5, 2018 Share: Share on Facebook Share on Twitter Copy URL to your clipboard All News Quote And just as I promised the American people from this podium 11 months ago, we enacted the biggest tax cuts and reforms in American history. Our massive tax cuts provide tremendous relief for the middle class and small business. President Donald J. Trump BIGGEST TAX CUTS AND REFORMS: Because of President Donald J. Trump, Americans will benefit from the biggest tax cuts and reforms in American history. President Trump’s tax cuts are the biggest gross tax cuts in American history, cutting over $5.5 trillion in taxes over ten years. The President’s tax law included substantial reforms to make taxes simpler and fairer, which helped offset the cost of the tax cuts and thereby limit the net tax cut to $1.5 trillion. President Trump cut the corporate tax rate from 35 percent to 21 percent, the largest percentage point reduction of the top marginal rate in history. President Trump’s tax cuts include the biggest increase in the child tax credit in history. The Child Tax Credit was increased by $573.4 billion over ten years, larger than any previous change to credits specifically targeting families. President Trump’s tax cuts included some of the most substantial reforms to the tax code in American history. The Tax Cuts and Jobs Act will help end the offshoring of corporate money by transitioning the country to a territorial system of corporate taxation and creating anti-abuse rules for multinationals that artificially shift profits offshore. The Tax Cuts and Jobs Act nearly doubles the standard deduction, to simplify tax filing. The Tax Cuts and Jobs Act limits itemized deductions, while maintaining the most popular deductions, such as the mortgage interest deduction and charitable giving deduction. The Tax Cuts and Jobs Act facilitates school choice by allowing families to use 529 college savings plans for elementary and secondary education expense and spend up to $10,000 annually on private school tuition and related expenses, in addition to the uses previously allowed. The first new community development tax incentive program enacted since the Clinton administration, providing an opportunity for mainstream private investors to support businesses and distressed communities with the creation of Opportunity Zones. The Tax Cuts and Jobs Act repeals the individual mandate, marking the single largest legislative blow to Obamacare since the law was passed. This individual mandate is particularly painful for low and middle-income Americans: 79 percent of people who paid the penalty in 2016 had household income below $50,000. The tax law’s repeal of the individual mandate relieves Americans from the unprecedented assault on liberty, where the Federal Government fined Americans for not purchasing something. As a combination of tax cuts and tax reform, the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act was therefore the biggest legislative action reforming our tax code in history. AMERICAN COMPANIES ARE DELIVERING: Businesses throughout the country are responding to President Trump’s tax cuts by rewarding American workers. Since President Trump provided his historic tax cuts and reforms, more than 3.5 million American workers across more than 300 companies have received bonuses, raises, and increased. Many companies have also announced new investments and new hiring. Best Buy has announced it is giving a $1,000 bonus to full-time employees and a $500 bonus to part-time employees, in addition to investing $20 million to expand technology development centers across the United States. Quest Diagnostics is giving a bonus of up to $500 to nearly 40,000 employees and investing $75 million of its tax savings back into the company and employees. Discover announced it would raise its minimum wage to $15.25 an hour and had paid a $1,000 bonus to more than 15,000 non-executive employees. Hostess Brands is providing employees with a $750 cash bonus and $500 contribution to their 401(k) accounts, in addition to providing a year’s worth of free Hostess products. Cigna announced that it was increasing its minimum wage in the United States to $16 an hour and adding $30 million to its 401(k) program to match additional contributions, benefitting more than 30,000 employees. Lowe’s announced it was giving a bonus of up to $1,000 to employees and expanding its benefits package for full-time workers to include 10 weeks of maternity leave, two weeks of parental leave, and adoption assistance. BUILDING ON OUR ECONOMIC MOMENTUM: President Trump’s tax cuts are expanding on a strong economy that continues to benefit American workers. Average hourly wages increased by 2.9 percent last year, the largest increase in 8 years. 200,000 jobs were added in January, while the unemployment rate remained at its lowest level in 17 years, 4.1 percent. Manufacturing expanded in January at near the fastest pace since 2004, according to the Institute for Supply Management data. Recent polling shows Americans are satisfied with the state of the U.S. economy, with the percentage of those polled with positive views of the economy at a 17-year high. Consumer optimism increased in January according to The Conference Board’s Consumer Confidence Survey. Consumers are confident that the strong pace of growth seen in late 2017 will continue in 2018. According to the UBS Investor Watch Quarterly, which surveys business owner sentiment, optimism has soared since the passage of tax reform. UBS found that positive economic outlook among business owners has grown by 18 percentage points between quarter four of 2017 and quarter one of 2018. UBS found that 79 percent of the businesses owners surveyed were satisfied with the tax bill and 72 percent believed it would boost the economy. WhiteHouse.gov The White House Twitter Facebook Instagram YouTube President Donald J. Trump Vice President Mike Pence First Lady Melania Trump Mrs. Karen Pence The Cabinet Administration Accomplishments News Remarks Articles Presidential Actions Briefings & Statements About The White House Economy & Jobs Budget & Spending Education Immigration National Security & Defense Healthcare Council of Economic Advisers Council of Environmental Quality National Security Council Office of Management and Budget Office of National Drug Control Policy Office of Science and Technology Policy Copyright Privacy Policy Menu News Remarks Briefings & Statements Presidential Actions Articles All News Issues Education National Security & Defense Budget & Spending Immigration Healthcare All Issues The Administration President Donald J. Trump Vice President Michael R. Pence First Lady Melania Trump Second Lady Karen Pence The Cabinet Disclosures Executive Offices Council of Economic Advisers Council on Environmental Quality National Security Council Office of Management and Budget Office of National Drug Control Policy Office of Science and Technology Policy About The White House White House Tours Past Presidents Past First Ladies The Grounds Our Government Get Involved Write or Call the White House White House Internship Program White House Fellows Contact Live Search Type Your Search Press enter to searchHunter Biden: What was he doing in China and Ukraine? Skip to content British Broadcasting Corporation Home News Sport Business Innovation Culture Arts Travel Earth Audio Video Live Home News Israel-Gaza War War in Ukraine US & Canada UK UK Politics England N. Ireland N. Ireland Politics Scotland Scotland Politics Wales Wales Politics Africa Asia China India Australia Europe Latin America Middle East In Pictures BBC InDepth BBC Verify Sport Business Executive Lounge Technology of Business Future of Business Innovation Technology Science & Health Artificial Intelligence AI v the Mind Culture Film & TV Music Art & Design Style Books Entertainment News Arts Arts in Motion Travel Destinations Africa Antarctica Asia Australia and Pacific Caribbean & Bermuda Central America Europe Middle East North America South America World’s Table Culture & Experiences Adventures The SpeciaList Earth Natural Wonders Weather & Science Climate Solutions Sustainable Business Green Living Audio Podcasts Radio Audio FAQs Video Live Live News Live Sport Home News Sport Business Innovation Culture Arts Travel Earth Audio Video Live Weather Newsletters Hunter Biden: What was he doing in China and Ukraine? 6 April 2021 Share Save Share Save Getty Images Vice-President Biden in 2016 with his son Hunter looking on Hunter Biden, second son of US President Joe Biden, is being investigated by the Justice Department over his finances including, according to US media reports, some of his business dealings in China. During the 2020 election campaign, he and his father were frequently accused by Donald Trump and his associates of wrongdoing in regards to China and Ukraine, allegations which they both denied. The New York Post reported on an alleged email in which an adviser from a Ukrainian energy company, Burisma, apparently thanked Hunter for inviting him to meet his father, Joe Biden. Asked about the allegations, Joe Biden told a reporter it was a "smear campaign". No criminal activity has been proven, and no evidence has emerged that Mr Biden did anything to intentionally benefit his son. In an interview with the BBC months after his father was sworn in as president, Hunter Biden defended his qualifications for the position at Burisma but added that, in retrospect, he had "missed... the perception that I would create". Claims of influence-peddling are common in Washington DC and Mr Trump's children have also been accused of conflicts of interest in lucrative business deals overseas. They, too, deny wrongdoing. What do we know about the federal investigation? The Justice Department is investigating Hunter Biden's finances including scrutinising some of his past Chinese business dealings and other transactions, a "person familiar with the matter" told The Associated Press in December . The tax investigation was launched in 2018 but Hunter Biden said he had learned about it for the first time in December 2020. Asked about the investigation by US broadcaster CBS this April, the president's son said: "I'm co-operating, completely. And I'm absolutely certain, 100% certain, that at the end of the investigation, that I will be cleared of any wrongdoing." What have the Bidens been accused of in China? The New York Post cited a purported email from Hunter Biden in August 2017 indicating he was receiving a $10m annual fee from a Chinese billionaire for "introductions alone", though it is unclear who was involved in the alleged introductions. Another purported email, which Fox News said it had confirmed, reportedly refers to a deal pursued by Hunter involving China's largest private energy firm. It is said to include a cryptic mention of "10 held by H for the big guy". Fox News cited unnamed sources as saying "the big guy" in the purported email was a reference to Joe Biden. This message is said to be from May 2017. Both emails would date from when the former US vice-president was a private citizen. A former business associate of Hunter Biden has come forward to say he can confirm the allegations. Tony Bobulinski told Fox News that, contrary to Joe Biden's statements that he had nothing to do with his son's business affairs, Hunter had "frequently referenced asking him for his sign-off or advice on various potential deals" in China. Mr Bobulinski, who is reportedly a US Navy veteran, separately told Fox News' Tucker Carlson that he had met on two occasions with Joe Biden to discuss business deals with China, the first time in May 2017 when Barack Obama's former vice-president was a private citizen. He says he asked Joe Biden's brother, James, whether the family was concerned about possible scrutiny of the former vice-president's involvement in a potential business deal with a Chinese entity. Mr Bobulinski told Fox News that James Biden had replied: "Plausible deniability." Mr Bobulinski was invited by Mr Trump to be his guest at the final presidential debate in Nashville, Tennessee on 22 October. What is known about Hunter's dealings in China? In 2013, Hunter flew aboard Air Force Two with his father, who was then vice-president, on an official visit to Beijing, where the younger Biden met investment banker Jonathan Li. Hunter told the New Yorker he had just met Mr Li for "a cup of coffee", but 12 days after the trip a private equity fund, BHR Partners, was approved by the Chinese authorities. Mr Li was chief executive and Hunter was a board member. He would hold a 10% stake. Getty Images Joe Biden walks out of Air Force Two with his granddaughter and son, Hunter Biden BHR is backed by some of China's largest state banks and by local governments, according to US media. Hunter Biden's lawyer said he had joined the board in an unpaid position "based on his interest in seeking ways to bring Chinese capital to international markets". His lawyer also said his client did not acquire his financial stake in BHR until 2017, after his father had left office in the US. Hunter resigned from the board of BHR in April 2020, but still held his 10% stake in BHR as of July this year, according to the company report. What did the New York Post say about Hunter Biden and Ukraine? The New York Post reported an email from April 2015, in which an adviser to Burisma, Vadym Pozharskyi, apparently thanked Hunter Biden for inviting him to meet his father in Washington. Hunter was a director on the board of Burisma - a Ukrainian-owned private energy company while his father was the Obama administration's pointman on US-Ukrainian relations. Hunter was one of several foreigners on its board. The New York Post article did not provide evidence that the meeting had ever taken place. The Biden election campaign said there was no record of any such meeting on the former vice-president's "official schedule" from the time. But in a statement to Politico , the campaign also acknowledged that Mr Biden could have had an "informal interaction" with the Burisma adviser that did not appear on his official schedule, though it said any such encounter would have been "cursory". "Investigations by the press, during impeachment, and even by two Republican-led Senate committees whose work was decried as 'not legitimate' and political by a GOP colleague, have all reached the same conclusion: that Joe Biden carried out official US policy toward Ukraine and engaged in no wrongdoing," said Andrew Bates, a spokesman for Mr Biden. What we know about Biden-Ukraine corruption claims Mr Biden's team has also decried the New York Post story as "Russian disinformation", though it did not say the emails were bogus. The New York Post article was shared by President Trump and his allies. Two of his former advisers, Steve Bannon and Rudy Giuliani, were involved in providing the story and the hard drive containing the alleged emails, to the newspaper. Mr Giuliani says the messages were found on a laptop that Hunter dropped off at a Delaware repair shop in April 2019. Sceptics have noted that Mr Giuliani travelled in December 2019 to Kyiv where he met Ukrainian lawmaker Andriy Derkach, whom the US Treasury has designated as a longtime Kremlin agent. Mr Giuliani has acknowledged trying dig up dirt on the Bidens in Ukraine. But the US Director of National Intelligence, John Ratcliffe, told Fox Business that the purported emails were not connected to a Russian disinformation effort. Other US media say they have been unable to verify the authenticity of the emails. Hunter has neither confirmed nor denied that he dropped off a laptop at the location. Hunter joined Burisma in 2014, and remained on the board until April 2019, when he decided to leave. Speaking to the BBC, he said Burisma had seen his name "as gold" and that it had played a large part in his appointment to the board. Twitter and Facebook's action over Joe Biden article reignites bias claims What are the Bidens accused of in Ukraine? Donald Trump and his allies accused Joe Biden of wrongdoing because he had pushed, while vice-president, for the Ukrainian government to fire its top prosecutor, who was investigating the company for which Hunter worked. In 2016, Joe Biden called for the dismissal of Ukrainian prosecutor Viktor Shokin, whose office had Burisma and other companies under investigation. However, other Western leaders and major bodies that give financial support to Ukraine also wanted the prosecutor dismissed because they believed he was not active enough in tackling corruption. What else has the Biden campaign said? Shortly before the final presidential debate last year, the Democrat's camp released a statement denying wrongdoing. "Joe Biden has never even considered being involved in business with his family, nor in any overseas business whatsoever," said the statement. "He has never held stock in any such business arrangements nor has any family member or any other person ever held stock for him. "What is true is that Tony Bobulinski admitted on the record to Breitbart that he is angry that he was *not* able to go into business with Hunter and James Biden [Joe Biden's brother]." What did this have to do with impeachment? In 2019, details emerged of a phone call Mr Trump, the then president, had made to the president of Ukraine, in which he had urged the Ukrainian leader to investigate the Bidens. President Trump's impeachment explained This led to charges by the Democrats that Mr Trump was trying to illegally pressure Ukraine to help damage his election rival, resulting in impeachment by the House of Representatives. Mr Trump denied he had done anything wrong, and he was later acquitted by the Republican-controlled US Senate. Getty Images President Trump holds a copy of The Washington Post the day after the US Senate acquitted him on two articles of impeachment Has anything been proven against the Bidens? While no criminal activity has been proven, it has raised questions about potential conflicts of interest. A senior State Department official raised such concerns as far back as 2015. Joe Biden's son defends foreign dealings US Republican lawmakers launched an investigation and found last year that Hunter's work for the Ukrainian firm had been "problematic" - but there wasn't evidence that US foreign policy was influenced by it. No criminal charges were proven against Burisma either. The company issued a statement in 2017 saying "all legal proceedings and pending criminal allegations" against it were closed. Last year, Yuriy Lutsenko, the prosecutor in Ukraine who succeeded Viktor Shokin, told the BBC that there was no reason to investigate the Bidens under Ukrainian law. There is nothing illegal about sitting on a board of a company whilst family members serve in government. Hunter Biden's lawyers said in statement in October 2019 that he had undertaken "these business activities independently. He did not believe it appropriate to discuss them with his father, nor did he." Hunter told the New Yorker magazine that on the only occasion he had mentioned Burisma: "Dad said, 'I hope you know what you are doing.'" Amid all the scrutiny, Joe Biden promised last year that if he was elected president, no-one in his family would hold a job or have a business relationship with a foreign corporation or foreign government. Impeachment of Donald Trump US election 2020 BBC Verify Hunter Biden Joe Biden Related Jeremy Bowen: Trump-Zelensky row signals looming crisis between Europe and US 1 Mar 2025 World 'The boss' featured at Trump hush-money trial 25 Apr 2024 US & Canada How did US impeachments go from rare to routine? 28 Sep 2023 US & Canada More 2 days ago Trump's former VP Mike Pence receives JFK Courage Award Pence defied calls by Donald Trump to overturn the result of the 2020 election, and was shunned by Republicans as a result. 2 days ago US & Canada 25 Apr 2025 What would it mean for Ukraine to temporarily give up land? As Ukraine reckons with the terms of a possible peace deal, BBC Verify asks what it could mean in practice. 25 Apr 2025 BBC Verify 16 Apr 2025 Watch: Biden attacks Trump in first speech since leaving White House The former US president says his successor has "done so much damage and so much destruction" in his first days in office. 16 Apr 2025 US & Canada 16 Apr 2025 Biden attacks Trump in first speech since leaving White House The ex-president uses the speech to criticise the Trump administration's cuts to the welfare agency. 16 Apr 2025 US & Canada 15 Apr 2025 Trump blames Zelensky for starting war after massive Russian attack The US president apportioned blame to Ukraine's leader hours after the deadliest strike on civilians this year. 15 Apr 2025 World British Broadcasting Corporation Home News Sport Business Innovation Culture Arts Travel Earth Audio Video Live Weather BBC Shop BritBox BBC in other languages Follow BBC on: Terms of Use About the BBC Privacy Policy Cookies Accessibility Help Contact the BBC Advertise with us Do not share or sell my info Contact technical support Copyright 2025 BBC. All rights reserved. The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites. Read about our approach to external linking.Hunter Biden: What was he doing in China and Ukraine? Skip to content British Broadcasting Corporation Home News Sport Business Innovation Culture Arts Travel Earth Audio Video Live Home News Israel-Gaza War War in Ukraine US & Canada UK UK Politics England N. Ireland N. Ireland Politics Scotland Scotland Politics Wales Wales Politics Africa Asia China India Australia Europe Latin America Middle East In Pictures BBC InDepth BBC Verify Sport Business Executive Lounge Technology of Business Future of Business Innovation Technology Science & Health Artificial Intelligence AI v the Mind Culture Film & TV Music Art & Design Style Books Entertainment News Arts Arts in Motion Travel Destinations Africa Antarctica Asia Australia and Pacific Caribbean & Bermuda Central America Europe Middle East North America South America World’s Table Culture & Experiences Adventures The SpeciaList Earth Natural Wonders Weather & Science Climate Solutions Sustainable Business Green Living Audio Podcasts Radio Audio FAQs Video Live Live News Live Sport Home News Sport Business Innovation Culture Arts Travel Earth Audio Video Live Weather Newsletters Hunter Biden: What was he doing in China and Ukraine? 6 April 2021 Share Save Share Save Getty Images Vice-President Biden in 2016 with his son Hunter looking on Hunter Biden, second son of US President Joe Biden, is being investigated by the Justice Department over his finances including, according to US media reports, some of his business dealings in China. During the 2020 election campaign, he and his father were frequently accused by Donald Trump and his associates of wrongdoing in regards to China and Ukraine, allegations which they both denied. The New York Post reported on an alleged email in which an adviser from a Ukrainian energy company, Burisma, apparently thanked Hunter for inviting him to meet his father, Joe Biden. Asked about the allegations, Joe Biden told a reporter it was a "smear campaign". No criminal activity has been proven, and no evidence has emerged that Mr Biden did anything to intentionally benefit his son. In an interview with the BBC months after his father was sworn in as president, Hunter Biden defended his qualifications for the position at Burisma but added that, in retrospect, he had "missed... the perception that I would create". Claims of influence-peddling are common in Washington DC and Mr Trump's children have also been accused of conflicts of interest in lucrative business deals overseas. They, too, deny wrongdoing. What do we know about the federal investigation? The Justice Department is investigating Hunter Biden's finances including scrutinising some of his past Chinese business dealings and other transactions, a "person familiar with the matter" told The Associated Press in December . The tax investigation was launched in 2018 but Hunter Biden said he had learned about it for the first time in December 2020. Asked about the investigation by US broadcaster CBS this April, the president's son said: "I'm co-operating, completely. And I'm absolutely certain, 100% certain, that at the end of the investigation, that I will be cleared of any wrongdoing." What have the Bidens been accused of in China? The New York Post cited a purported email from Hunter Biden in August 2017 indicating he was receiving a $10m annual fee from a Chinese billionaire for "introductions alone", though it is unclear who was involved in the alleged introductions. Another purported email, which Fox News said it had confirmed, reportedly refers to a deal pursued by Hunter involving China's largest private energy firm. It is said to include a cryptic mention of "10 held by H for the big guy". Fox News cited unnamed sources as saying "the big guy" in the purported email was a reference to Joe Biden. This message is said to be from May 2017. Both emails would date from when the former US vice-president was a private citizen. A former business associate of Hunter Biden has come forward to say he can confirm the allegations. Tony Bobulinski told Fox News that, contrary to Joe Biden's statements that he had nothing to do with his son's business affairs, Hunter had "frequently referenced asking him for his sign-off or advice on various potential deals" in China. Mr Bobulinski, who is reportedly a US Navy veteran, separately told Fox News' Tucker Carlson that he had met on two occasions with Joe Biden to discuss business deals with China, the first time in May 2017 when Barack Obama's former vice-president was a private citizen. He says he asked Joe Biden's brother, James, whether the family was concerned about possible scrutiny of the former vice-president's involvement in a potential business deal with a Chinese entity. Mr Bobulinski told Fox News that James Biden had replied: "Plausible deniability." Mr Bobulinski was invited by Mr Trump to be his guest at the final presidential debate in Nashville, Tennessee on 22 October. What is known about Hunter's dealings in China? In 2013, Hunter flew aboard Air Force Two with his father, who was then vice-president, on an official visit to Beijing, where the younger Biden met investment banker Jonathan Li. Hunter told the New Yorker he had just met Mr Li for "a cup of coffee", but 12 days after the trip a private equity fund, BHR Partners, was approved by the Chinese authorities. Mr Li was chief executive and Hunter was a board member. He would hold a 10% stake. Getty Images Joe Biden walks out of Air Force Two with his granddaughter and son, Hunter Biden BHR is backed by some of China's largest state banks and by local governments, according to US media. Hunter Biden's lawyer said he had joined the board in an unpaid position "based on his interest in seeking ways to bring Chinese capital to international markets". His lawyer also said his client did not acquire his financial stake in BHR until 2017, after his father had left office in the US. Hunter resigned from the board of BHR in April 2020, but still held his 10% stake in BHR as of July this year, according to the company report. What did the New York Post say about Hunter Biden and Ukraine? The New York Post reported an email from April 2015, in which an adviser to Burisma, Vadym Pozharskyi, apparently thanked Hunter Biden for inviting him to meet his father in Washington. Hunter was a director on the board of Burisma - a Ukrainian-owned private energy company while his father was the Obama administration's pointman on US-Ukrainian relations. Hunter was one of several foreigners on its board. The New York Post article did not provide evidence that the meeting had ever taken place. The Biden election campaign said there was no record of any such meeting on the former vice-president's "official schedule" from the time. But in a statement to Politico , the campaign also acknowledged that Mr Biden could have had an "informal interaction" with the Burisma adviser that did not appear on his official schedule, though it said any such encounter would have been "cursory". "Investigations by the press, during impeachment, and even by two Republican-led Senate committees whose work was decried as 'not legitimate' and political by a GOP colleague, have all reached the same conclusion: that Joe Biden carried out official US policy toward Ukraine and engaged in no wrongdoing," said Andrew Bates, a spokesman for Mr Biden. What we know about Biden-Ukraine corruption claims Mr Biden's team has also decried the New York Post story as "Russian disinformation", though it did not say the emails were bogus. The New York Post article was shared by President Trump and his allies. Two of his former advisers, Steve Bannon and Rudy Giuliani, were involved in providing the story and the hard drive containing the alleged emails, to the newspaper. Mr Giuliani says the messages were found on a laptop that Hunter dropped off at a Delaware repair shop in April 2019. Sceptics have noted that Mr Giuliani travelled in December 2019 to Kyiv where he met Ukrainian lawmaker Andriy Derkach, whom the US Treasury has designated as a longtime Kremlin agent. Mr Giuliani has acknowledged trying dig up dirt on the Bidens in Ukraine. But the US Director of National Intelligence, John Ratcliffe, told Fox Business that the purported emails were not connected to a Russian disinformation effort. Other US media say they have been unable to verify the authenticity of the emails. Hunter has neither confirmed nor denied that he dropped off a laptop at the location. Hunter joined Burisma in 2014, and remained on the board until April 2019, when he decided to leave. Speaking to the BBC, he said Burisma had seen his name "as gold" and that it had played a large part in his appointment to the board. Twitter and Facebook's action over Joe Biden article reignites bias claims What are the Bidens accused of in Ukraine? Donald Trump and his allies accused Joe Biden of wrongdoing because he had pushed, while vice-president, for the Ukrainian government to fire its top prosecutor, who was investigating the company for which Hunter worked. In 2016, Joe Biden called for the dismissal of Ukrainian prosecutor Viktor Shokin, whose office had Burisma and other companies under investigation. However, other Western leaders and major bodies that give financial support to Ukraine also wanted the prosecutor dismissed because they believed he was not active enough in tackling corruption. What else has the Biden campaign said? Shortly before the final presidential debate last year, the Democrat's camp released a statement denying wrongdoing. "Joe Biden has never even considered being involved in business with his family, nor in any overseas business whatsoever," said the statement. "He has never held stock in any such business arrangements nor has any family member or any other person ever held stock for him. "What is true is that Tony Bobulinski admitted on the record to Breitbart that he is angry that he was *not* able to go into business with Hunter and James Biden [Joe Biden's brother]." What did this have to do with impeachment? In 2019, details emerged of a phone call Mr Trump, the then president, had made to the president of Ukraine, in which he had urged the Ukrainian leader to investigate the Bidens. President Trump's impeachment explained This led to charges by the Democrats that Mr Trump was trying to illegally pressure Ukraine to help damage his election rival, resulting in impeachment by the House of Representatives. Mr Trump denied he had done anything wrong, and he was later acquitted by the Republican-controlled US Senate. Getty Images President Trump holds a copy of The Washington Post the day after the US Senate acquitted him on two articles of impeachment Has anything been proven against the Bidens? While no criminal activity has been proven, it has raised questions about potential conflicts of interest. A senior State Department official raised such concerns as far back as 2015. Joe Biden's son defends foreign dealings US Republican lawmakers launched an investigation and found last year that Hunter's work for the Ukrainian firm had been "problematic" - but there wasn't evidence that US foreign policy was influenced by it. No criminal charges were proven against Burisma either. The company issued a statement in 2017 saying "all legal proceedings and pending criminal allegations" against it were closed. Last year, Yuriy Lutsenko, the prosecutor in Ukraine who succeeded Viktor Shokin, told the BBC that there was no reason to investigate the Bidens under Ukrainian law. There is nothing illegal about sitting on a board of a company whilst family members serve in government. Hunter Biden's lawyers said in statement in October 2019 that he had undertaken "these business activities independently. He did not believe it appropriate to discuss them with his father, nor did he." Hunter told the New Yorker magazine that on the only occasion he had mentioned Burisma: "Dad said, 'I hope you know what you are doing.'" Amid all the scrutiny, Joe Biden promised last year that if he was elected president, no-one in his family would hold a job or have a business relationship with a foreign corporation or foreign government. Impeachment of Donald Trump US election 2020 BBC Verify Hunter Biden Joe Biden Related Jeremy Bowen: Trump-Zelensky row signals looming crisis between Europe and US 1 Mar 2025 World 'The boss' featured at Trump hush-money trial 25 Apr 2024 US & Canada How did US impeachments go from rare to routine? 28 Sep 2023 US & Canada More 2 days ago Trump's former VP Mike Pence receives JFK Courage Award Pence defied calls by Donald Trump to overturn the result of the 2020 election, and was shunned by Republicans as a result. 2 days ago US & Canada 25 Apr 2025 What would it mean for Ukraine to temporarily give up land? As Ukraine reckons with the terms of a possible peace deal, BBC Verify asks what it could mean in practice. 25 Apr 2025 BBC Verify 16 Apr 2025 Watch: Biden attacks Trump in first speech since leaving White House The former US president says his successor has "done so much damage and so much destruction" in his first days in office. 16 Apr 2025 US & Canada 16 Apr 2025 Biden attacks Trump in first speech since leaving White House The ex-president uses the speech to criticise the Trump administration's cuts to the welfare agency. 16 Apr 2025 US & Canada 15 Apr 2025 Trump blames Zelensky for starting war after massive Russian attack The US president apportioned blame to Ukraine's leader hours after the deadliest strike on civilians this year. 15 Apr 2025 World British Broadcasting Corporation Home News Sport Business Innovation Culture Arts Travel Earth Audio Video Live Weather BBC Shop BritBox BBC in other languages Follow BBC on: Terms of Use About the BBC Privacy Policy Cookies Accessibility Help Contact the BBC Advertise with us Do not share or sell my info Contact technical support Copyright 2025 BBC. All rights reserved. The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites. Read about our approach to external linking.The Bidens’ Influence Peddling Timeline - United States House Committee on Oversight and Accountability Skip to main content Toggle navigation Search About Chairman James Comer Full Committee Rules Committee Activity Calendar Hearings Letters Markups Reports Forums Subcommittees Cybersecurity, Information Technology, and Government Innovation Economic Growth, Energy Policy, and Regulatory Affairs Government Operations Health Care and Financial Services Military and Foreign Affairs Federal Law Enforcement Delivering on Government Efficiency Task Force on the Declassification of Federal Secrets Media Center Press Releases The Overview Biden Family Investigation The Bidens’ Influence Peddling Timeline Biden's Border Crisis COVID Origins Blow the Whistle The Bidens’ Influence Peddling Timeline Since taking the gavel in January, the Committee on Oversight and Accountability has accelerated its investigation of the Biden family’s domestic and international business practices to determine whether the Biden family has been targeted by foreign actors, President Biden is compromised, and our national security is threatened. Records obtained through the Committee’s subpoenas to date reveal that the Bidens and their associates have received over $20 million in payments from foreign entities. Below is a timeline that details key dates in our investigation. The main points of interest are: 1) Romania: On September 28, 2015, Vice President Biden welcomed Romanian President Klaus Iohannis to the White House. Within five weeks of this meeting, a Romanian businessman involved with a high-profile corruption prosecution in Romania, Gabriel Popoviciu, began depositing a Biden associate’s bank account, which ultimately made their way into Biden family accounts. Popoviciu made sixteen of the seventeen payments, totaling over $3 million, to the Biden associate account while Joe Biden was Vice President. Biden family accounts ultimately received approximately $1.038 million. The total amount from Romania to the Biden family and their associates is over $3 million. 2) China- CEFC: On March 1, 2017—less than two months after Vice President Joe Biden left public office—State Energy HK Limited, a Chinese company, wired $3 million to a Biden associate’s account. This is the same bank account used in the above “Romania” section. After the Chinese company wired the Biden associate account the $3 million, the Biden family received approximately $1,065,692 over a three-month period in different bank accounts. Additionally, the CEFC Chairman gives Hunter Biden a diamond worth $80,000. Lastly, CEFC creates a joint venture with the Bidens in the summer of 2017. The timeline lays out the “WhatsApp” messages and subsequent wires from the Chinese to the Bidens of $100,000 and $5 million. The total amount from China, specifically with CEFC and their related entities, to the Biden family and their associates is over $8 million. 3) Kazakhstan: On April 22, 2014, Kenes Rakishev, a Kazakhstani oligarch used his Singaporean entity, Novatus Holdings, to wire one of Hunter Biden’s Rosemont Seneca entities $142,300. The very next day—April 23, 2014—the Rosemont Seneca entity transferred the exact same amount of money to a car dealership for a car for Hunter Biden. Hunter Biden and Devon Archer would represent Burisma in Kazakhstan in May/June of 2014 as the company attempted to broker a three-way deal among Burisma, the Kazakhstan government, and a Chinese state-owned energy company. 4) Ukraine: Devon Archer joined the Burisma board of directors in spring of 2014 and was joined by Hunter Biden shortly thereafter. Hunter Biden joined the company as counsel, but after a meeting with Burisma owner Mykola Zlochevsky in Lake Como, Italy, was elevated to the board of directors in the spring of 2014. Both Biden and Archer were each paid $1 million per year for their positions on the board of directors. In December 2015, after a Burisma board of directors meeting, Zlochevsky and Hunter Biden “called D.C.” in the wake of mounting pressures the company was facing. Zlochevsky was later charged with bribing Ukrainian officials with $6 million in an attempt to delay or drop the investigation into his company. The total amount from Ukraine to the Biden family and their associates is $6.5 million. 5) Russia: On February 14, 2014, a Russian oligarch and Russia’s richest woman, Yelena Baturina, wired a Rosemont Seneca entity $3.5 million. On March 11, 2014, the wire was split up: $750,000 was transferred to Devon Archer, and the remainder was sent to Rosemont Seneca Bohai, a company Devon Archer and Hunter Biden split equally. In spring of 2014, Yelena Baturina joined Hunter Biden and Devon Archer to share a meal with then-Vice President Biden at a restaurant in Washington, D.C. The total amount from Russia to the Biden family and their associates is $3.5 million. Beyond this timeline, here are links to our First , Second , Third , and Fourth Bank Memorandums that provide detailed descriptions and show actual bank records and wires. Biden Family Timeline China – BHR China- CEFC Hunter Biden Criminal Investigation Kazakhstan Romania Russia Ukraine 2009 January 20, 2009 Important Date Obama-Biden Administration begins. 2013 November 1, 2013 China – BHR Hunter Biden, business associate, and Chinese investors agree to create Bohai Harvest RST Equity Investment Fund Management Co., Ltd. (BHR), an investment fund controlled by the Bank of China, to focus on mergers and acquisitions, and investment in and reforms of state-owned enterprise. December 4, 2013 China – BHR Vice President Biden travels with Hunter Biden on Air Force 2 to China and meets CEO of BHR, Jonathan Li. Shortly thereafter, BHR’s business license was approved and Hunter Biden was a board member. 2014 February 5, 2014 Kazakhstan Hunter Biden met Kazakhstani oligarch Kenes Rakishev at the Hay Adams Hotel in Washington, D.C. In email correspondences with Devon Archer surrounding the meeting, Rakishev requested Secretary of State John Kerry visit Kazakhstan. Archer replied, “if we have some business started as planned I will ensure its planned soonest.” Rakishev is a Kazakhstani oligarch and millionaire and was a director at Kazakhstan’s state-owned oil company KazMunayGas. Rakishev maintained close ties to Karim Massimov, who became prime minister on April 2, 2014. February 14, 2014 Russia Russian oligarch Yelena Baturina – the wealthiest woman in Russia and then married to the former mayor of Moscow—wired the Rosemont Seneca Thornton bank account $3.5 million. Rosemont Seneca Thornton’s beneficiary was Rosemont Seneca Partners, of which Hunter Biden was the chairman. March 11, 2014 Russia Rosemont Seneca Thornton transferred $2,752,711 to a Rosemont Seneca Bohai bank account. Also on March 11, 2014, $750,000 of the original wire from Baturina was sent to Devon Archer from Rosemont Seneca Thornton. Rosemont Seneca Bohai was an entity used by both Hunter Biden and Devon Archer. In his testimony to the Committee, Archer confirmed that he and Hunter Biden were 50-50 owners in Rosemont Seneca Bohai. Rosemont Seneca Bohai was opened in Delaware on February 13, 2014—the day before the $3.5 million wire from Yelena Baturina. The bank records can be found in the third bank records memo. April 1, 2014 Russia and Kazakhstan In the spring of 2014, after Yelena Baturina sent the $3.5 million wire to Rosemont Seneca Thornton and around the same time that Kenes Rakishev wired money to Rosemont Seneca Bohai for Hunter Biden’s sportscar, Vice President Biden attended dinner with Yelena Baturina, Kenes Rakishev, Karim Massimov, Hunter Biden, Devon Archer, and others at Café Milano in Washington, D.C. Joe Biden stayed for dinner. Devon Archer provided this information during his transcribed interview . April 15, 2014 Ukraine Burisma, a Ukrainian energy company, appoints Biden business associate to their board of directors. April 22, 2014 Kazakhstan Kenes Rakishev’s Singaporean company wires $142,300 through his Latvian company to a Rosemont entity. The details can be found in the third bank records memorandum . April 22, 2014 Ukraine Vice President Biden travels to Ukraine and gives an anti-corruption speech. April 23, 2014 Kazakhstan The Rosemont entity wires $142,300 to a car dealership in New Jersey for a new sports car for Hunter Biden. The details can be found in the third bank records memorandum . May 12, 2014 Ukraine Burisma announces Hunter Biden joined its board of directors. May 21, 2014 Romania Vice President Biden visits Romania and delivers a speech to the Romanian Prime Minister, judges, prosecutors, and leaders of the Romanian Parliament. September 12, 2014 China – BHR BHR invests $1.7 billion in CCP-linked petroleum and chemical company. December 9, 2014 China – BHR Hunter Biden and business associate invest $484,920 into BHR. December 22, 2014 Kazakhstan Kenes Rakishev’s Kazakhstani oil company and Burisma join with a CCP-linked company and announce a transnational financial arrangement. 2015 April 16, 2015 Ukraine and Kazakhstan On April 16, 2015, Vice President Joe Biden attended a dinner with Karim Massimov, Vadym Pozharsky, Hunter Biden, Devon Archer, and others at Café Milano in Washington, D.C. Devon Archer provided this information during his transcribed interview . September 15, 2015 China – BHR BHR joins with a CCP-linked entity to acquire US-based Henniges Automotive in a deal reportedly worth $600 million. September 28, 2015 Romania Vice President Biden welcomes Romanian President Klaus Iohannis to the White House. A readout of the meeting states, the “Vice President welcomed President Iohannis’ focus on anti-corruption efforts and rule of law as a means to strengthen national security and promote greater investment and economic growth.” President Iohannis said the Vice President “voiced satisfaction over Romania’s progress with the fight against corruption.” November 2, 2015 Ukraine Vadym Pozharskyi suggests high level U.S. level officials come to Ukraine and talk with Prosecutor General Viktor Shokin and President Petro Poroshenko about Mykola Zlochevsky’s investigations. Prosecutor General Shokin was investigating Burisma and Burisma’s owner, Zlochevsky for fraud. Prosecutor General Shokin is the Ukranian government official Vice President Biden demanded Poroshenko fire. November 5, 2015 Romania Romanian businessman, Gabriel Popoviciu, begins making deposits into Robinson Walker, LLC’s bank account. Robinson Walker, LLC is an entity owned by a Biden associate, Rob Walker. Popoviciu’s company sent Robinson Walker the first wire for $179,836.86. From November 2015 to May 2017, Popoviciu’s company paid Robinson Walker, LLC over $3 million. Biden family accounts received approximately $1.038 million from the Robinson Walker, LLC account after Popoviciu’s deposits. Sixteen of the seventeen payments from Popoviciu’s company to Robinson Walker, LLC were made while Joe Biden was Vice President. Details can be found in the Second Bank Records Memorandum . November 6, 2015 Ukraine Amos Hochstein, a high level U.S. government offical working in the Obama-Biden Administration, meets with Hunter Biden and discusses Burisma. November 9, 2015 Romania Rob Walker’s account wires Hunter Biden $59,900. Details can be found in the Second Bank Records Memorandum. November 11, 2015 Ukraine Amos Hochstein meets with Vice President Biden in the West Wing. November 12, 2015 Ukraine Amos Hochstein calls Hunter Biden. November 13, 2015 Romania Hunter Biden meets with the U.S. Ambassador to Romania. November 13, 2015 Ukraine VP Biden touched down in Ukraine last night. Read his initial notes from the road: https://t.co/FdPysDjiqT pic.twitter.com/ybZFp7frYe — VP Biden (Archived) (@VP44) December 7, 2015 Vice President Biden announces trip to Ukraine to take place the first week of December 2015. November 14, 2015 Ukraine Vadym Pozharskyi emails Hunter Biden confirmation that the Vice President will be traveling to Ukraine. November 14, 2015 Romania Hunter Biden meets with the Ambassador of Romania to the United States. November 15, 2015 Romania Hunter Biden travels to Romania. December 4, 2015 Ukraine Mykola Zlochevsky and Vadym Pozharsky complain about constant “government pressures” and urge Hunter Biden to call the Vice President of the United States, Joe Biden. Devon Archer testified that Hunter Biden, Zlochevsky, and Pozharsky “called D.C.” Devon Archer provided this information during his transcribed interview . December 7, 2015 China – CEFC Hunter Biden and CEFC Chairman Ye Jianming begin communicating regarding a possible U.S. partnership. December 7, 2015 Romania Robinson Walker, LLC wires Hunter Biden $59,725. Details can be found in the Second Bank Records Memorandum. December 7, 2015 Ukraine https://oversight.house.gov/wp-content/uploads/2023/07/Biden-Firing-Ukraine-Prosecutor-Clip.mp4 Vice President Biden arrives in Ukraine, where he demands Prosecutor General Shokin be fired if Ukraine wants $1 billion in International Monetary Fund (IMF) loans. December 9, 2015 Ukraine Vice President Biden departs Ukraine and gets a commitment from President Poroshenko that Prosecutor General Shokin will be fired. December 17, 2015 Ukraine Vice President Biden hosts a holiday party at the Vice Presidential residence, which Amos Hochstein and Hunter Biden both attend. December 23, 2015 Romania Robinson Walker, LLC wires Hunter Biden $60,091.24. Details can be found in the Second Bank Records Memorandum . 2016 January 20, 2016 Ukraine Vice President Biden meets with President Poroshenko in Switzerland at the World Economic Forum where Biden reinforced the linkage between the loan guarantee and the necessary reforms. February 4, 2016 Ukraine Mykola Zlochevsky gives Hunter Biden unspecified, extravagant birthday gifts. February 11, 2016 Ukraine Vice President Biden and President Poroshenko conduct a call. February 12, 2016 Romania Robinson Walker, LLC wires Hunter Biden’s Owasco P.C. $61,126.24. Details can be found in the Second Bank Records Memorandum. February 16, 2016 Ukraine President Poroshenko asks Prosecutor General Shokin to resign. February 18, 2016 Ukraine Vice President Biden calls President Poroshenko to thank him for calling on Prosecutor General Shokin to resign. February 19, 2016 Ukraine President Poroshenko says he recieved Prosecutor General Shokin’s letter of resignation. March 24, 2016 Romania Robinson Walker, LLC wires Owasco P.C. $61,816.05. Details can be found in the Second Bank Records Memorandum. March 29, 2016 Romania Hunter Biden meets again with U.S. Ambassador to Romania. March 29, 2016 Ukraine Ukranian Parliament approves President Poroshenko’s firing of Prosecutor General Shokin. May 23, 2016 Romania Robinson Walker, LLC wires Owasco P.C. $123,830.80. Details can be found in the Second Bank Records Memorandum. May 23, 2016 Romania Robinson Walker, LLC wires Owasco P.C. $53,419.74. Details can be found in the Second Bank Records Memorandum. July 11, 2016 Romania Robinson Walker, LLC wires Owasco P.C. $116,860.93. Details can be found in the Second Bank Records Memorandum. Load More Share via Email About Chairman James Comer Full Committee Rules Committee Activity Calendar Hearings Letters Markups Reports Forums Subcommittees Cybersecurity, Information Technology, and Government Innovation Economic Growth, Energy Policy, and Regulatory Affairs Government Operations Health Care and Financial Services Military and Foreign Affairs Federal Law Enforcement Delivering on Government Efficiency Task Force on the Declassification of Federal Secrets Media Center Press Releases The Overview Biden Family Investigation The Bidens’ Influence Peddling Timeline Biden's Border Crisis COVID Origins Blow the Whistle Minority © 2025 Committee on Oversight and Government Reform Privacy Policy 2157 Rayburn House Office Building Washington, DC 20515 Phone: (202) 225-5074 Fax: (202) 225-3974 Search About Chairman James Comer Full Committee Rules Committee Activity Calendar Hearings Letters Markups Reports Forums Subcommittees Cybersecurity, Information Technology, and Government Innovation Economic Growth, Energy Policy, and Regulatory Affairs Government Operations Health Care and Financial Services Military and Foreign Affairs Federal Law Enforcement Delivering on Government Efficiency Task Force on the Declassification of Federal Secrets Media Center Press Releases The Overview Biden Family Investigation The Bidens’ Influence Peddling Timeline Biden's Border Crisis COVID Origins Blow the WhistleHunter Biden: What was he doing in China and Ukraine? Skip to content British Broadcasting Corporation Home News Sport Business Innovation Culture Arts Travel Earth Audio Video Live Home News Israel-Gaza War War in Ukraine US & Canada UK UK Politics England N. Ireland N. Ireland Politics Scotland Scotland Politics Wales Wales Politics Africa Asia China India Australia Europe Latin America Middle East In Pictures BBC InDepth BBC Verify Sport Business Executive Lounge Technology of Business Future of Business Innovation Technology Science & Health Artificial Intelligence AI v the Mind Culture Film & TV Music Art & Design Style Books Entertainment News Arts Arts in Motion Travel Destinations Africa Antarctica Asia Australia and Pacific Caribbean & Bermuda Central America Europe Middle East North America South America World’s Table Culture & Experiences Adventures The SpeciaList Earth Natural Wonders Weather & Science Climate Solutions Sustainable Business Green Living Audio Podcasts Radio Audio FAQs Video Live Live News Live Sport Home News Sport Business Innovation Culture Arts Travel Earth Audio Video Live Weather Newsletters Hunter Biden: What was he doing in China and Ukraine? 6 April 2021 Share Save Share Save Getty Images Vice-President Biden in 2016 with his son Hunter looking on Hunter Biden, second son of US President Joe Biden, is being investigated by the Justice Department over his finances including, according to US media reports, some of his business dealings in China. During the 2020 election campaign, he and his father were frequently accused by Donald Trump and his associates of wrongdoing in regards to China and Ukraine, allegations which they both denied. The New York Post reported on an alleged email in which an adviser from a Ukrainian energy company, Burisma, apparently thanked Hunter for inviting him to meet his father, Joe Biden. Asked about the allegations, Joe Biden told a reporter it was a "smear campaign". No criminal activity has been proven, and no evidence has emerged that Mr Biden did anything to intentionally benefit his son. In an interview with the BBC months after his father was sworn in as president, Hunter Biden defended his qualifications for the position at Burisma but added that, in retrospect, he had "missed... the perception that I would create". Claims of influence-peddling are common in Washington DC and Mr Trump's children have also been accused of conflicts of interest in lucrative business deals overseas. They, too, deny wrongdoing. What do we know about the federal investigation? The Justice Department is investigating Hunter Biden's finances including scrutinising some of his past Chinese business dealings and other transactions, a "person familiar with the matter" told The Associated Press in December . The tax investigation was launched in 2018 but Hunter Biden said he had learned about it for the first time in December 2020. Asked about the investigation by US broadcaster CBS this April, the president's son said: "I'm co-operating, completely. And I'm absolutely certain, 100% certain, that at the end of the investigation, that I will be cleared of any wrongdoing." What have the Bidens been accused of in China? The New York Post cited a purported email from Hunter Biden in August 2017 indicating he was receiving a $10m annual fee from a Chinese billionaire for "introductions alone", though it is unclear who was involved in the alleged introductions. Another purported email, which Fox News said it had confirmed, reportedly refers to a deal pursued by Hunter involving China's largest private energy firm. It is said to include a cryptic mention of "10 held by H for the big guy". Fox News cited unnamed sources as saying "the big guy" in the purported email was a reference to Joe Biden. This message is said to be from May 2017. Both emails would date from when the former US vice-president was a private citizen. A former business associate of Hunter Biden has come forward to say he can confirm the allegations. Tony Bobulinski told Fox News that, contrary to Joe Biden's statements that he had nothing to do with his son's business affairs, Hunter had "frequently referenced asking him for his sign-off or advice on various potential deals" in China. Mr Bobulinski, who is reportedly a US Navy veteran, separately told Fox News' Tucker Carlson that he had met on two occasions with Joe Biden to discuss business deals with China, the first time in May 2017 when Barack Obama's former vice-president was a private citizen. He says he asked Joe Biden's brother, James, whether the family was concerned about possible scrutiny of the former vice-president's involvement in a potential business deal with a Chinese entity. Mr Bobulinski told Fox News that James Biden had replied: "Plausible deniability." Mr Bobulinski was invited by Mr Trump to be his guest at the final presidential debate in Nashville, Tennessee on 22 October. What is known about Hunter's dealings in China? In 2013, Hunter flew aboard Air Force Two with his father, who was then vice-president, on an official visit to Beijing, where the younger Biden met investment banker Jonathan Li. Hunter told the New Yorker he had just met Mr Li for "a cup of coffee", but 12 days after the trip a private equity fund, BHR Partners, was approved by the Chinese authorities. Mr Li was chief executive and Hunter was a board member. He would hold a 10% stake. Getty Images Joe Biden walks out of Air Force Two with his granddaughter and son, Hunter Biden BHR is backed by some of China's largest state banks and by local governments, according to US media. Hunter Biden's lawyer said he had joined the board in an unpaid position "based on his interest in seeking ways to bring Chinese capital to international markets". His lawyer also said his client did not acquire his financial stake in BHR until 2017, after his father had left office in the US. Hunter resigned from the board of BHR in April 2020, but still held his 10% stake in BHR as of July this year, according to the company report. What did the New York Post say about Hunter Biden and Ukraine? The New York Post reported an email from April 2015, in which an adviser to Burisma, Vadym Pozharskyi, apparently thanked Hunter Biden for inviting him to meet his father in Washington. Hunter was a director on the board of Burisma - a Ukrainian-owned private energy company while his father was the Obama administration's pointman on US-Ukrainian relations. Hunter was one of several foreigners on its board. The New York Post article did not provide evidence that the meeting had ever taken place. The Biden election campaign said there was no record of any such meeting on the former vice-president's "official schedule" from the time. But in a statement to Politico , the campaign also acknowledged that Mr Biden could have had an "informal interaction" with the Burisma adviser that did not appear on his official schedule, though it said any such encounter would have been "cursory". "Investigations by the press, during impeachment, and even by two Republican-led Senate committees whose work was decried as 'not legitimate' and political by a GOP colleague, have all reached the same conclusion: that Joe Biden carried out official US policy toward Ukraine and engaged in no wrongdoing," said Andrew Bates, a spokesman for Mr Biden. What we know about Biden-Ukraine corruption claims Mr Biden's team has also decried the New York Post story as "Russian disinformation", though it did not say the emails were bogus. The New York Post article was shared by President Trump and his allies. Two of his former advisers, Steve Bannon and Rudy Giuliani, were involved in providing the story and the hard drive containing the alleged emails, to the newspaper. Mr Giuliani says the messages were found on a laptop that Hunter dropped off at a Delaware repair shop in April 2019. Sceptics have noted that Mr Giuliani travelled in December 2019 to Kyiv where he met Ukrainian lawmaker Andriy Derkach, whom the US Treasury has designated as a longtime Kremlin agent. Mr Giuliani has acknowledged trying dig up dirt on the Bidens in Ukraine. But the US Director of National Intelligence, John Ratcliffe, told Fox Business that the purported emails were not connected to a Russian disinformation effort. Other US media say they have been unable to verify the authenticity of the emails. Hunter has neither confirmed nor denied that he dropped off a laptop at the location. Hunter joined Burisma in 2014, and remained on the board until April 2019, when he decided to leave. Speaking to the BBC, he said Burisma had seen his name "as gold" and that it had played a large part in his appointment to the board. Twitter and Facebook's action over Joe Biden article reignites bias claims What are the Bidens accused of in Ukraine? Donald Trump and his allies accused Joe Biden of wrongdoing because he had pushed, while vice-president, for the Ukrainian government to fire its top prosecutor, who was investigating the company for which Hunter worked. In 2016, Joe Biden called for the dismissal of Ukrainian prosecutor Viktor Shokin, whose office had Burisma and other companies under investigation. However, other Western leaders and major bodies that give financial support to Ukraine also wanted the prosecutor dismissed because they believed he was not active enough in tackling corruption. What else has the Biden campaign said? Shortly before the final presidential debate last year, the Democrat's camp released a statement denying wrongdoing. "Joe Biden has never even considered being involved in business with his family, nor in any overseas business whatsoever," said the statement. "He has never held stock in any such business arrangements nor has any family member or any other person ever held stock for him. "What is true is that Tony Bobulinski admitted on the record to Breitbart that he is angry that he was *not* able to go into business with Hunter and James Biden [Joe Biden's brother]." What did this have to do with impeachment? In 2019, details emerged of a phone call Mr Trump, the then president, had made to the president of Ukraine, in which he had urged the Ukrainian leader to investigate the Bidens. President Trump's impeachment explained This led to charges by the Democrats that Mr Trump was trying to illegally pressure Ukraine to help damage his election rival, resulting in impeachment by the House of Representatives. Mr Trump denied he had done anything wrong, and he was later acquitted by the Republican-controlled US Senate. Getty Images President Trump holds a copy of The Washington Post the day after the US Senate acquitted him on two articles of impeachment Has anything been proven against the Bidens? While no criminal activity has been proven, it has raised questions about potential conflicts of interest. A senior State Department official raised such concerns as far back as 2015. Joe Biden's son defends foreign dealings US Republican lawmakers launched an investigation and found last year that Hunter's work for the Ukrainian firm had been "problematic" - but there wasn't evidence that US foreign policy was influenced by it. No criminal charges were proven against Burisma either. The company issued a statement in 2017 saying "all legal proceedings and pending criminal allegations" against it were closed. Last year, Yuriy Lutsenko, the prosecutor in Ukraine who succeeded Viktor Shokin, told the BBC that there was no reason to investigate the Bidens under Ukrainian law. There is nothing illegal about sitting on a board of a company whilst family members serve in government. Hunter Biden's lawyers said in statement in October 2019 that he had undertaken "these business activities independently. He did not believe it appropriate to discuss them with his father, nor did he." Hunter told the New Yorker magazine that on the only occasion he had mentioned Burisma: "Dad said, 'I hope you know what you are doing.'" Amid all the scrutiny, Joe Biden promised last year that if he was elected president, no-one in his family would hold a job or have a business relationship with a foreign corporation or foreign government. Impeachment of Donald Trump US election 2020 BBC Verify Hunter Biden Joe Biden Related Jeremy Bowen: Trump-Zelensky row signals looming crisis between Europe and US 1 Mar 2025 World 'The boss' featured at Trump hush-money trial 25 Apr 2024 US & Canada How did US impeachments go from rare to routine? 28 Sep 2023 US & Canada More Just now Trump appeasing Putin with pressure on Ukraine, Biden tells BBC In his first interview since leaving office, the 82-year-old criticises his successor's handling of the war and is challenged on his own record. Just now World Just now Watch: Biden's first interview since leaving the White House Former US President Joe Biden talks Trump, Russia and US-Europe relations with the BBC's Today programme. Just now US & Canada 2 days ago Trump's former VP Mike Pence receives JFK Courage Award Pence defied calls by Donald Trump to overturn the result of the 2020 election, and was shunned by Republicans as a result. 2 days ago US & Canada 25 Apr 2025 What would it mean for Ukraine to temporarily give up land? As Ukraine reckons with the terms of a possible peace deal, BBC Verify asks what it could mean in practice. 25 Apr 2025 BBC Verify 16 Apr 2025 Watch: Biden attacks Trump in first speech since leaving White House The former US president says his successor has "done so much damage and so much destruction" in his first days in office. 16 Apr 2025 US & Canada British Broadcasting Corporation Home News Sport Business Innovation Culture Arts Travel Earth Audio Video Live Weather BBC Shop BritBox BBC in other languages Follow BBC on: Terms of Use About the BBC Privacy Policy Cookies Accessibility Help Contact the BBC Advertise with us Do not share or sell my info Contact technical support Copyright 2025 BBC. All rights reserved. The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites. Read about our approach to external linking.Hunter Biden: What was he doing in China and Ukraine? Skip to content British Broadcasting Corporation Home News Sport Business Innovation Culture Arts Travel Earth Audio Video Live Home News Israel-Gaza War War in Ukraine US & Canada UK UK Politics England N. Ireland N. Ireland Politics Scotland Scotland Politics Wales Wales Politics Africa Asia China India Australia Europe Latin America Middle East In Pictures BBC InDepth BBC Verify Sport Business Executive Lounge Technology of Business Future of Business Innovation Technology Science & Health Artificial Intelligence AI v the Mind Culture Film & TV Music Art & Design Style Books Entertainment News Arts Arts in Motion Travel Destinations Africa Antarctica Asia Australia and Pacific Caribbean & Bermuda Central America Europe Middle East North America South America World’s Table Culture & Experiences Adventures The SpeciaList Earth Natural Wonders Weather & Science Climate Solutions Sustainable Business Green Living Audio Podcasts Radio Audio FAQs Video Live Live News Live Sport Home News Sport Business Innovation Culture Arts Travel Earth Audio Video Live Weather Newsletters Hunter Biden: What was he doing in China and Ukraine? 6 April 2021 Share Save Share Save Getty Images Vice-President Biden in 2016 with his son Hunter looking on Hunter Biden, second son of US President Joe Biden, is being investigated by the Justice Department over his finances including, according to US media reports, some of his business dealings in China. During the 2020 election campaign, he and his father were frequently accused by Donald Trump and his associates of wrongdoing in regards to China and Ukraine, allegations which they both denied. The New York Post reported on an alleged email in which an adviser from a Ukrainian energy company, Burisma, apparently thanked Hunter for inviting him to meet his father, Joe Biden. Asked about the allegations, Joe Biden told a reporter it was a "smear campaign". No criminal activity has been proven, and no evidence has emerged that Mr Biden did anything to intentionally benefit his son. In an interview with the BBC months after his father was sworn in as president, Hunter Biden defended his qualifications for the position at Burisma but added that, in retrospect, he had "missed... the perception that I would create". Claims of influence-peddling are common in Washington DC and Mr Trump's children have also been accused of conflicts of interest in lucrative business deals overseas. They, too, deny wrongdoing. What do we know about the federal investigation? The Justice Department is investigating Hunter Biden's finances including scrutinising some of his past Chinese business dealings and other transactions, a "person familiar with the matter" told The Associated Press in December . The tax investigation was launched in 2018 but Hunter Biden said he had learned about it for the first time in December 2020. Asked about the investigation by US broadcaster CBS this April, the president's son said: "I'm co-operating, completely. And I'm absolutely certain, 100% certain, that at the end of the investigation, that I will be cleared of any wrongdoing." What have the Bidens been accused of in China? The New York Post cited a purported email from Hunter Biden in August 2017 indicating he was receiving a $10m annual fee from a Chinese billionaire for "introductions alone", though it is unclear who was involved in the alleged introductions. Another purported email, which Fox News said it had confirmed, reportedly refers to a deal pursued by Hunter involving China's largest private energy firm. It is said to include a cryptic mention of "10 held by H for the big guy". Fox News cited unnamed sources as saying "the big guy" in the purported email was a reference to Joe Biden. This message is said to be from May 2017. Both emails would date from when the former US vice-president was a private citizen. A former business associate of Hunter Biden has come forward to say he can confirm the allegations. Tony Bobulinski told Fox News that, contrary to Joe Biden's statements that he had nothing to do with his son's business affairs, Hunter had "frequently referenced asking him for his sign-off or advice on various potential deals" in China. Mr Bobulinski, who is reportedly a US Navy veteran, separately told Fox News' Tucker Carlson that he had met on two occasions with Joe Biden to discuss business deals with China, the first time in May 2017 when Barack Obama's former vice-president was a private citizen. He says he asked Joe Biden's brother, James, whether the family was concerned about possible scrutiny of the former vice-president's involvement in a potential business deal with a Chinese entity. Mr Bobulinski told Fox News that James Biden had replied: "Plausible deniability." Mr Bobulinski was invited by Mr Trump to be his guest at the final presidential debate in Nashville, Tennessee on 22 October. What is known about Hunter's dealings in China? In 2013, Hunter flew aboard Air Force Two with his father, who was then vice-president, on an official visit to Beijing, where the younger Biden met investment banker Jonathan Li. Hunter told the New Yorker he had just met Mr Li for "a cup of coffee", but 12 days after the trip a private equity fund, BHR Partners, was approved by the Chinese authorities. Mr Li was chief executive and Hunter was a board member. He would hold a 10% stake. Getty Images Joe Biden walks out of Air Force Two with his granddaughter and son, Hunter Biden BHR is backed by some of China's largest state banks and by local governments, according to US media. Hunter Biden's lawyer said he had joined the board in an unpaid position "based on his interest in seeking ways to bring Chinese capital to international markets". His lawyer also said his client did not acquire his financial stake in BHR until 2017, after his father had left office in the US. Hunter resigned from the board of BHR in April 2020, but still held his 10% stake in BHR as of July this year, according to the company report. What did the New York Post say about Hunter Biden and Ukraine? The New York Post reported an email from April 2015, in which an adviser to Burisma, Vadym Pozharskyi, apparently thanked Hunter Biden for inviting him to meet his father in Washington. Hunter was a director on the board of Burisma - a Ukrainian-owned private energy company while his father was the Obama administration's pointman on US-Ukrainian relations. Hunter was one of several foreigners on its board. The New York Post article did not provide evidence that the meeting had ever taken place. The Biden election campaign said there was no record of any such meeting on the former vice-president's "official schedule" from the time. But in a statement to Politico , the campaign also acknowledged that Mr Biden could have had an "informal interaction" with the Burisma adviser that did not appear on his official schedule, though it said any such encounter would have been "cursory". "Investigations by the press, during impeachment, and even by two Republican-led Senate committees whose work was decried as 'not legitimate' and political by a GOP colleague, have all reached the same conclusion: that Joe Biden carried out official US policy toward Ukraine and engaged in no wrongdoing," said Andrew Bates, a spokesman for Mr Biden. What we know about Biden-Ukraine corruption claims Mr Biden's team has also decried the New York Post story as "Russian disinformation", though it did not say the emails were bogus. The New York Post article was shared by President Trump and his allies. Two of his former advisers, Steve Bannon and Rudy Giuliani, were involved in providing the story and the hard drive containing the alleged emails, to the newspaper. Mr Giuliani says the messages were found on a laptop that Hunter dropped off at a Delaware repair shop in April 2019. Sceptics have noted that Mr Giuliani travelled in December 2019 to Kyiv where he met Ukrainian lawmaker Andriy Derkach, whom the US Treasury has designated as a longtime Kremlin agent. Mr Giuliani has acknowledged trying dig up dirt on the Bidens in Ukraine. But the US Director of National Intelligence, John Ratcliffe, told Fox Business that the purported emails were not connected to a Russian disinformation effort. Other US media say they have been unable to verify the authenticity of the emails. Hunter has neither confirmed nor denied that he dropped off a laptop at the location. Hunter joined Burisma in 2014, and remained on the board until April 2019, when he decided to leave. Speaking to the BBC, he said Burisma had seen his name "as gold" and that it had played a large part in his appointment to the board. Twitter and Facebook's action over Joe Biden article reignites bias claims What are the Bidens accused of in Ukraine? Donald Trump and his allies accused Joe Biden of wrongdoing because he had pushed, while vice-president, for the Ukrainian government to fire its top prosecutor, who was investigating the company for which Hunter worked. In 2016, Joe Biden called for the dismissal of Ukrainian prosecutor Viktor Shokin, whose office had Burisma and other companies under investigation. However, other Western leaders and major bodies that give financial support to Ukraine also wanted the prosecutor dismissed because they believed he was not active enough in tackling corruption. What else has the Biden campaign said? Shortly before the final presidential debate last year, the Democrat's camp released a statement denying wrongdoing. "Joe Biden has never even considered being involved in business with his family, nor in any overseas business whatsoever," said the statement. "He has never held stock in any such business arrangements nor has any family member or any other person ever held stock for him. "What is true is that Tony Bobulinski admitted on the record to Breitbart that he is angry that he was *not* able to go into business with Hunter and James Biden [Joe Biden's brother]." What did this have to do with impeachment? In 2019, details emerged of a phone call Mr Trump, the then president, had made to the president of Ukraine, in which he had urged the Ukrainian leader to investigate the Bidens. President Trump's impeachment explained This led to charges by the Democrats that Mr Trump was trying to illegally pressure Ukraine to help damage his election rival, resulting in impeachment by the House of Representatives. Mr Trump denied he had done anything wrong, and he was later acquitted by the Republican-controlled US Senate. Getty Images President Trump holds a copy of The Washington Post the day after the US Senate acquitted him on two articles of impeachment Has anything been proven against the Bidens? While no criminal activity has been proven, it has raised questions about potential conflicts of interest. A senior State Department official raised such concerns as far back as 2015. Joe Biden's son defends foreign dealings US Republican lawmakers launched an investigation and found last year that Hunter's work for the Ukrainian firm had been "problematic" - but there wasn't evidence that US foreign policy was influenced by it. No criminal charges were proven against Burisma either. The company issued a statement in 2017 saying "all legal proceedings and pending criminal allegations" against it were closed. Last year, Yuriy Lutsenko, the prosecutor in Ukraine who succeeded Viktor Shokin, told the BBC that there was no reason to investigate the Bidens under Ukrainian law. There is nothing illegal about sitting on a board of a company whilst family members serve in government. Hunter Biden's lawyers said in statement in October 2019 that he had undertaken "these business activities independently. He did not believe it appropriate to discuss them with his father, nor did he." Hunter told the New Yorker magazine that on the only occasion he had mentioned Burisma: "Dad said, 'I hope you know what you are doing.'" Amid all the scrutiny, Joe Biden promised last year that if he was elected president, no-one in his family would hold a job or have a business relationship with a foreign corporation or foreign government. Impeachment of Donald Trump US election 2020 BBC Verify Hunter Biden Joe Biden Related Jeremy Bowen: Trump-Zelensky row signals looming crisis between Europe and US 1 Mar 2025 World 'The boss' featured at Trump hush-money trial 25 Apr 2024 US & Canada How did US impeachments go from rare to routine? 28 Sep 2023 US & Canada More 7 mins ago Trump appeasing Putin with pressure on Ukraine, Biden tells BBC In his first interview since leaving office, the 82-year-old criticises his successor's handling of the war and is challenged on his own record. 7 mins ago World 8 mins ago Watch: Biden's first interview since leaving the White House Former US President Joe Biden talks Trump, Russia and US-Europe relations with the BBC's Today programme. 8 mins ago US & Canada 2 days ago Trump's former VP Mike Pence receives JFK Courage Award Pence defied calls by Donald Trump to overturn the result of the 2020 election, and was shunned by Republicans as a result. 2 days ago US & Canada 25 Apr 2025 What would it mean for Ukraine to temporarily give up land? As Ukraine reckons with the terms of a possible peace deal, BBC Verify asks what it could mean in practice. 25 Apr 2025 BBC Verify 16 Apr 2025 Watch: Biden attacks Trump in first speech since leaving White House The former US president says his successor has "done so much damage and so much destruction" in his first days in office. 16 Apr 2025 US & Canada British Broadcasting Corporation Home News Sport Business Innovation Culture Arts Travel Earth Audio Video Live Weather BBC Shop BritBox BBC in other languages Follow BBC on: Terms of Use About the BBC Privacy Policy Cookies Accessibility Help Contact the BBC Advertise with us Do not share or sell my info Contact technical support Copyright 2025 BBC. All rights reserved. The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites. Read about our approach to external linking.The Bidens’ Influence Peddling Timeline - United States House Committee on Oversight and Accountability Skip to main content Toggle navigation Search About Chairman James Comer Full Committee Rules Committee Activity Calendar Hearings Letters Markups Reports Forums Subcommittees Cybersecurity, Information Technology, and Government Innovation Economic Growth, Energy Policy, and Regulatory Affairs Government Operations Health Care and Financial Services Military and Foreign Affairs Federal Law Enforcement Delivering on Government Efficiency Task Force on the Declassification of Federal Secrets Media Center Press Releases The Overview Biden Family Investigation The Bidens’ Influence Peddling Timeline Biden's Border Crisis COVID Origins Blow the Whistle The Bidens’ Influence Peddling Timeline Since taking the gavel in January, the Committee on Oversight and Accountability has accelerated its investigation of the Biden family’s domestic and international business practices to determine whether the Biden family has been targeted by foreign actors, President Biden is compromised, and our national security is threatened. Records obtained through the Committee’s subpoenas to date reveal that the Bidens and their associates have received over $20 million in payments from foreign entities. Below is a timeline that details key dates in our investigation. The main points of interest are: 1) Romania: On September 28, 2015, Vice President Biden welcomed Romanian President Klaus Iohannis to the White House. Within five weeks of this meeting, a Romanian businessman involved with a high-profile corruption prosecution in Romania, Gabriel Popoviciu, began depositing a Biden associate’s bank account, which ultimately made their way into Biden family accounts. Popoviciu made sixteen of the seventeen payments, totaling over $3 million, to the Biden associate account while Joe Biden was Vice President. Biden family accounts ultimately received approximately $1.038 million. The total amount from Romania to the Biden family and their associates is over $3 million. 2) China- CEFC: On March 1, 2017—less than two months after Vice President Joe Biden left public office—State Energy HK Limited, a Chinese company, wired $3 million to a Biden associate’s account. This is the same bank account used in the above “Romania” section. After the Chinese company wired the Biden associate account the $3 million, the Biden family received approximately $1,065,692 over a three-month period in different bank accounts. Additionally, the CEFC Chairman gives Hunter Biden a diamond worth $80,000. Lastly, CEFC creates a joint venture with the Bidens in the summer of 2017. The timeline lays out the “WhatsApp” messages and subsequent wires from the Chinese to the Bidens of $100,000 and $5 million. The total amount from China, specifically with CEFC and their related entities, to the Biden family and their associates is over $8 million. 3) Kazakhstan: On April 22, 2014, Kenes Rakishev, a Kazakhstani oligarch used his Singaporean entity, Novatus Holdings, to wire one of Hunter Biden’s Rosemont Seneca entities $142,300. The very next day—April 23, 2014—the Rosemont Seneca entity transferred the exact same amount of money to a car dealership for a car for Hunter Biden. Hunter Biden and Devon Archer would represent Burisma in Kazakhstan in May/June of 2014 as the company attempted to broker a three-way deal among Burisma, the Kazakhstan government, and a Chinese state-owned energy company. 4) Ukraine: Devon Archer joined the Burisma board of directors in spring of 2014 and was joined by Hunter Biden shortly thereafter. Hunter Biden joined the company as counsel, but after a meeting with Burisma owner Mykola Zlochevsky in Lake Como, Italy, was elevated to the board of directors in the spring of 2014. Both Biden and Archer were each paid $1 million per year for their positions on the board of directors. In December 2015, after a Burisma board of directors meeting, Zlochevsky and Hunter Biden “called D.C.” in the wake of mounting pressures the company was facing. Zlochevsky was later charged with bribing Ukrainian officials with $6 million in an attempt to delay or drop the investigation into his company. The total amount from Ukraine to the Biden family and their associates is $6.5 million. 5) Russia: On February 14, 2014, a Russian oligarch and Russia’s richest woman, Yelena Baturina, wired a Rosemont Seneca entity $3.5 million. On March 11, 2014, the wire was split up: $750,000 was transferred to Devon Archer, and the remainder was sent to Rosemont Seneca Bohai, a company Devon Archer and Hunter Biden split equally. In spring of 2014, Yelena Baturina joined Hunter Biden and Devon Archer to share a meal with then-Vice President Biden at a restaurant in Washington, D.C. The total amount from Russia to the Biden family and their associates is $3.5 million. Beyond this timeline, here are links to our First , Second , Third , and Fourth Bank Memorandums that provide detailed descriptions and show actual bank records and wires. Biden Family Timeline China – BHR China- CEFC Hunter Biden Criminal Investigation Kazakhstan Romania Russia Ukraine 2009 January 20, 2009 Important Date Obama-Biden Administration begins. 2013 November 1, 2013 China – BHR Hunter Biden, business associate, and Chinese investors agree to create Bohai Harvest RST Equity Investment Fund Management Co., Ltd. (BHR), an investment fund controlled by the Bank of China, to focus on mergers and acquisitions, and investment in and reforms of state-owned enterprise. December 4, 2013 China – BHR Vice President Biden travels with Hunter Biden on Air Force 2 to China and meets CEO of BHR, Jonathan Li. Shortly thereafter, BHR’s business license was approved and Hunter Biden was a board member. 2014 February 5, 2014 Kazakhstan Hunter Biden met Kazakhstani oligarch Kenes Rakishev at the Hay Adams Hotel in Washington, D.C. In email correspondences with Devon Archer surrounding the meeting, Rakishev requested Secretary of State John Kerry visit Kazakhstan. Archer replied, “if we have some business started as planned I will ensure its planned soonest.” Rakishev is a Kazakhstani oligarch and millionaire and was a director at Kazakhstan’s state-owned oil company KazMunayGas. Rakishev maintained close ties to Karim Massimov, who became prime minister on April 2, 2014. February 14, 2014 Russia Russian oligarch Yelena Baturina – the wealthiest woman in Russia and then married to the former mayor of Moscow—wired the Rosemont Seneca Thornton bank account $3.5 million. Rosemont Seneca Thornton’s beneficiary was Rosemont Seneca Partners, of which Hunter Biden was the chairman. March 11, 2014 Russia Rosemont Seneca Thornton transferred $2,752,711 to a Rosemont Seneca Bohai bank account. Also on March 11, 2014, $750,000 of the original wire from Baturina was sent to Devon Archer from Rosemont Seneca Thornton. Rosemont Seneca Bohai was an entity used by both Hunter Biden and Devon Archer. In his testimony to the Committee, Archer confirmed that he and Hunter Biden were 50-50 owners in Rosemont Seneca Bohai. Rosemont Seneca Bohai was opened in Delaware on February 13, 2014—the day before the $3.5 million wire from Yelena Baturina. The bank records can be found in the third bank records memo. April 1, 2014 Russia and Kazakhstan In the spring of 2014, after Yelena Baturina sent the $3.5 million wire to Rosemont Seneca Thornton and around the same time that Kenes Rakishev wired money to Rosemont Seneca Bohai for Hunter Biden’s sportscar, Vice President Biden attended dinner with Yelena Baturina, Kenes Rakishev, Karim Massimov, Hunter Biden, Devon Archer, and others at Café Milano in Washington, D.C. Joe Biden stayed for dinner. Devon Archer provided this information during his transcribed interview . April 15, 2014 Ukraine Burisma, a Ukrainian energy company, appoints Biden business associate to their board of directors. April 22, 2014 Kazakhstan Kenes Rakishev’s Singaporean company wires $142,300 through his Latvian company to a Rosemont entity. The details can be found in the third bank records memorandum . April 22, 2014 Ukraine Vice President Biden travels to Ukraine and gives an anti-corruption speech. April 23, 2014 Kazakhstan The Rosemont entity wires $142,300 to a car dealership in New Jersey for a new sports car for Hunter Biden. The details can be found in the third bank records memorandum . May 12, 2014 Ukraine Burisma announces Hunter Biden joined its board of directors. May 21, 2014 Romania Vice President Biden visits Romania and delivers a speech to the Romanian Prime Minister, judges, prosecutors, and leaders of the Romanian Parliament. September 12, 2014 China – BHR BHR invests $1.7 billion in CCP-linked petroleum and chemical company. December 9, 2014 China – BHR Hunter Biden and business associate invest $484,920 into BHR. December 22, 2014 Kazakhstan Kenes Rakishev’s Kazakhstani oil company and Burisma join with a CCP-linked company and announce a transnational financial arrangement. 2015 April 16, 2015 Ukraine and Kazakhstan On April 16, 2015, Vice President Joe Biden attended a dinner with Karim Massimov, Vadym Pozharsky, Hunter Biden, Devon Archer, and others at Café Milano in Washington, D.C. Devon Archer provided this information during his transcribed interview . September 15, 2015 China – BHR BHR joins with a CCP-linked entity to acquire US-based Henniges Automotive in a deal reportedly worth $600 million. September 28, 2015 Romania Vice President Biden welcomes Romanian President Klaus Iohannis to the White House. A readout of the meeting states, the “Vice President welcomed President Iohannis’ focus on anti-corruption efforts and rule of law as a means to strengthen national security and promote greater investment and economic growth.” President Iohannis said the Vice President “voiced satisfaction over Romania’s progress with the fight against corruption.” November 2, 2015 Ukraine Vadym Pozharskyi suggests high level U.S. level officials come to Ukraine and talk with Prosecutor General Viktor Shokin and President Petro Poroshenko about Mykola Zlochevsky’s investigations. Prosecutor General Shokin was investigating Burisma and Burisma’s owner, Zlochevsky for fraud. Prosecutor General Shokin is the Ukranian government official Vice President Biden demanded Poroshenko fire. November 5, 2015 Romania Romanian businessman, Gabriel Popoviciu, begins making deposits into Robinson Walker, LLC’s bank account. Robinson Walker, LLC is an entity owned by a Biden associate, Rob Walker. Popoviciu’s company sent Robinson Walker the first wire for $179,836.86. From November 2015 to May 2017, Popoviciu’s company paid Robinson Walker, LLC over $3 million. Biden family accounts received approximately $1.038 million from the Robinson Walker, LLC account after Popoviciu’s deposits. Sixteen of the seventeen payments from Popoviciu’s company to Robinson Walker, LLC were made while Joe Biden was Vice President. Details can be found in the Second Bank Records Memorandum . November 6, 2015 Ukraine Amos Hochstein, a high level U.S. government offical working in the Obama-Biden Administration, meets with Hunter Biden and discusses Burisma. November 9, 2015 Romania Rob Walker’s account wires Hunter Biden $59,900. Details can be found in the Second Bank Records Memorandum. November 11, 2015 Ukraine Amos Hochstein meets with Vice President Biden in the West Wing. November 12, 2015 Ukraine Amos Hochstein calls Hunter Biden. November 13, 2015 Romania Hunter Biden meets with the U.S. Ambassador to Romania. November 13, 2015 Ukraine VP Biden touched down in Ukraine last night. Read his initial notes from the road: https://t.co/FdPysDjiqT pic.twitter.com/ybZFp7frYe — VP Biden (Archived) (@VP44) December 7, 2015 Vice President Biden announces trip to Ukraine to take place the first week of December 2015. November 14, 2015 Ukraine Vadym Pozharskyi emails Hunter Biden confirmation that the Vice President will be traveling to Ukraine. November 14, 2015 Romania Hunter Biden meets with the Ambassador of Romania to the United States. November 15, 2015 Romania Hunter Biden travels to Romania. December 4, 2015 Ukraine Mykola Zlochevsky and Vadym Pozharsky complain about constant “government pressures” and urge Hunter Biden to call the Vice President of the United States, Joe Biden. Devon Archer testified that Hunter Biden, Zlochevsky, and Pozharsky “called D.C.” Devon Archer provided this information during his transcribed interview . December 7, 2015 China – CEFC Hunter Biden and CEFC Chairman Ye Jianming begin communicating regarding a possible U.S. partnership. December 7, 2015 Romania Robinson Walker, LLC wires Hunter Biden $59,725. Details can be found in the Second Bank Records Memorandum. December 7, 2015 Ukraine https://oversight.house.gov/wp-content/uploads/2023/07/Biden-Firing-Ukraine-Prosecutor-Clip.mp4 Vice President Biden arrives in Ukraine, where he demands Prosecutor General Shokin be fired if Ukraine wants $1 billion in International Monetary Fund (IMF) loans. December 9, 2015 Ukraine Vice President Biden departs Ukraine and gets a commitment from President Poroshenko that Prosecutor General Shokin will be fired. December 17, 2015 Ukraine Vice President Biden hosts a holiday party at the Vice Presidential residence, which Amos Hochstein and Hunter Biden both attend. December 23, 2015 Romania Robinson Walker, LLC wires Hunter Biden $60,091.24. Details can be found in the Second Bank Records Memorandum . 2016 January 20, 2016 Ukraine Vice President Biden meets with President Poroshenko in Switzerland at the World Economic Forum where Biden reinforced the linkage between the loan guarantee and the necessary reforms. February 4, 2016 Ukraine Mykola Zlochevsky gives Hunter Biden unspecified, extravagant birthday gifts. February 11, 2016 Ukraine Vice President Biden and President Poroshenko conduct a call. February 12, 2016 Romania Robinson Walker, LLC wires Hunter Biden’s Owasco P.C. $61,126.24. Details can be found in the Second Bank Records Memorandum. February 16, 2016 Ukraine President Poroshenko asks Prosecutor General Shokin to resign. February 18, 2016 Ukraine Vice President Biden calls President Poroshenko to thank him for calling on Prosecutor General Shokin to resign. February 19, 2016 Ukraine President Poroshenko says he recieved Prosecutor General Shokin’s letter of resignation. March 24, 2016 Romania Robinson Walker, LLC wires Owasco P.C. $61,816.05. Details can be found in the Second Bank Records Memorandum. March 29, 2016 Romania Hunter Biden meets again with U.S. Ambassador to Romania. March 29, 2016 Ukraine Ukranian Parliament approves President Poroshenko’s firing of Prosecutor General Shokin. May 23, 2016 Romania Robinson Walker, LLC wires Owasco P.C. $123,830.80. Details can be found in the Second Bank Records Memorandum. May 23, 2016 Romania Robinson Walker, LLC wires Owasco P.C. $53,419.74. Details can be found in the Second Bank Records Memorandum. July 11, 2016 Romania Robinson Walker, LLC wires Owasco P.C. $116,860.93. Details can be found in the Second Bank Records Memorandum. Load More Share via Email About Chairman James Comer Full Committee Rules Committee Activity Calendar Hearings Letters Markups Reports Forums Subcommittees Cybersecurity, Information Technology, and Government Innovation Economic Growth, Energy Policy, and Regulatory Affairs Government Operations Health Care and Financial Services Military and Foreign Affairs Federal Law Enforcement Delivering on Government Efficiency Task Force on the Declassification of Federal Secrets Media Center Press Releases The Overview Biden Family Investigation The Bidens’ Influence Peddling Timeline Biden's Border Crisis COVID Origins Blow the Whistle Minority © 2025 Committee on Oversight and Government Reform Privacy Policy 2157 Rayburn House Office Building Washington, DC 20515 Phone: (202) 225-5074 Fax: (202) 225-3974 Search About Chairman James Comer Full Committee Rules Committee Activity Calendar Hearings Letters Markups Reports Forums Subcommittees Cybersecurity, Information Technology, and Government Innovation Economic Growth, Energy Policy, and Regulatory Affairs Government Operations Health Care and Financial Services Military and Foreign Affairs Federal Law Enforcement Delivering on Government Efficiency Task Force on the Declassification of Federal Secrets Media Center Press Releases The Overview Biden Family Investigation The Bidens’ Influence Peddling Timeline Biden's Border Crisis COVID Origins Blow the WhistleHunter Biden: What was he doing in China and Ukraine? Skip to content British Broadcasting Corporation Home News Sport Business Innovation Culture Arts Travel Earth Audio Video Live Home News Israel-Gaza War War in Ukraine US & Canada UK UK Politics England N. Ireland N. Ireland Politics Scotland Scotland Politics Wales Wales Politics Africa Asia China India Australia Europe Latin America Middle East In Pictures BBC InDepth BBC Verify Sport Business Executive Lounge Technology of Business Future of Business Innovation Technology Science & Health Artificial Intelligence AI v the Mind Culture Film & TV Music Art & Design Style Books Entertainment News Arts Arts in Motion Travel Destinations Africa Antarctica Asia Australia and Pacific Caribbean & Bermuda Central America Europe Middle East North America South America World’s Table Culture & Experiences Adventures The SpeciaList Earth Natural Wonders Weather & Science Climate Solutions Sustainable Business Green Living Audio Podcasts Radio Audio FAQs Video Live Live News Live Sport Home News Sport Business Innovation Culture Arts Travel Earth Audio Video Live Weather Newsletters Hunter Biden: What was he doing in China and Ukraine? 6 April 2021 Share Save Share Save Getty Images Vice-President Biden in 2016 with his son Hunter looking on Hunter Biden, second son of US President Joe Biden, is being investigated by the Justice Department over his finances including, according to US media reports, some of his business dealings in China. During the 2020 election campaign, he and his father were frequently accused by Donald Trump and his associates of wrongdoing in regards to China and Ukraine, allegations which they both denied. The New York Post reported on an alleged email in which an adviser from a Ukrainian energy company, Burisma, apparently thanked Hunter for inviting him to meet his father, Joe Biden. Asked about the allegations, Joe Biden told a reporter it was a "smear campaign". No criminal activity has been proven, and no evidence has emerged that Mr Biden did anything to intentionally benefit his son. In an interview with the BBC months after his father was sworn in as president, Hunter Biden defended his qualifications for the position at Burisma but added that, in retrospect, he had "missed... the perception that I would create". Claims of influence-peddling are common in Washington DC and Mr Trump's children have also been accused of conflicts of interest in lucrative business deals overseas. They, too, deny wrongdoing. What do we know about the federal investigation? The Justice Department is investigating Hunter Biden's finances including scrutinising some of his past Chinese business dealings and other transactions, a "person familiar with the matter" told The Associated Press in December . The tax investigation was launched in 2018 but Hunter Biden said he had learned about it for the first time in December 2020. Asked about the investigation by US broadcaster CBS this April, the president's son said: "I'm co-operating, completely. And I'm absolutely certain, 100% certain, that at the end of the investigation, that I will be cleared of any wrongdoing." What have the Bidens been accused of in China? The New York Post cited a purported email from Hunter Biden in August 2017 indicating he was receiving a $10m annual fee from a Chinese billionaire for "introductions alone", though it is unclear who was involved in the alleged introductions. Another purported email, which Fox News said it had confirmed, reportedly refers to a deal pursued by Hunter involving China's largest private energy firm. It is said to include a cryptic mention of "10 held by H for the big guy". Fox News cited unnamed sources as saying "the big guy" in the purported email was a reference to Joe Biden. This message is said to be from May 2017. Both emails would date from when the former US vice-president was a private citizen. A former business associate of Hunter Biden has come forward to say he can confirm the allegations. Tony Bobulinski told Fox News that, contrary to Joe Biden's statements that he had nothing to do with his son's business affairs, Hunter had "frequently referenced asking him for his sign-off or advice on various potential deals" in China. Mr Bobulinski, who is reportedly a US Navy veteran, separately told Fox News' Tucker Carlson that he had met on two occasions with Joe Biden to discuss business deals with China, the first time in May 2017 when Barack Obama's former vice-president was a private citizen. He says he asked Joe Biden's brother, James, whether the family was concerned about possible scrutiny of the former vice-president's involvement in a potential business deal with a Chinese entity. Mr Bobulinski told Fox News that James Biden had replied: "Plausible deniability." Mr Bobulinski was invited by Mr Trump to be his guest at the final presidential debate in Nashville, Tennessee on 22 October. What is known about Hunter's dealings in China? In 2013, Hunter flew aboard Air Force Two with his father, who was then vice-president, on an official visit to Beijing, where the younger Biden met investment banker Jonathan Li. Hunter told the New Yorker he had just met Mr Li for "a cup of coffee", but 12 days after the trip a private equity fund, BHR Partners, was approved by the Chinese authorities. Mr Li was chief executive and Hunter was a board member. He would hold a 10% stake. Getty Images Joe Biden walks out of Air Force Two with his granddaughter and son, Hunter Biden BHR is backed by some of China's largest state banks and by local governments, according to US media. Hunter Biden's lawyer said he had joined the board in an unpaid position "based on his interest in seeking ways to bring Chinese capital to international markets". His lawyer also said his client did not acquire his financial stake in BHR until 2017, after his father had left office in the US. Hunter resigned from the board of BHR in April 2020, but still held his 10% stake in BHR as of July this year, according to the company report. What did the New York Post say about Hunter Biden and Ukraine? The New York Post reported an email from April 2015, in which an adviser to Burisma, Vadym Pozharskyi, apparently thanked Hunter Biden for inviting him to meet his father in Washington. Hunter was a director on the board of Burisma - a Ukrainian-owned private energy company while his father was the Obama administration's pointman on US-Ukrainian relations. Hunter was one of several foreigners on its board. The New York Post article did not provide evidence that the meeting had ever taken place. The Biden election campaign said there was no record of any such meeting on the former vice-president's "official schedule" from the time. But in a statement to Politico , the campaign also acknowledged that Mr Biden could have had an "informal interaction" with the Burisma adviser that did not appear on his official schedule, though it said any such encounter would have been "cursory". "Investigations by the press, during impeachment, and even by two Republican-led Senate committees whose work was decried as 'not legitimate' and political by a GOP colleague, have all reached the same conclusion: that Joe Biden carried out official US policy toward Ukraine and engaged in no wrongdoing," said Andrew Bates, a spokesman for Mr Biden. What we know about Biden-Ukraine corruption claims Mr Biden's team has also decried the New York Post story as "Russian disinformation", though it did not say the emails were bogus. The New York Post article was shared by President Trump and his allies. Two of his former advisers, Steve Bannon and Rudy Giuliani, were involved in providing the story and the hard drive containing the alleged emails, to the newspaper. Mr Giuliani says the messages were found on a laptop that Hunter dropped off at a Delaware repair shop in April 2019. Sceptics have noted that Mr Giuliani travelled in December 2019 to Kyiv where he met Ukrainian lawmaker Andriy Derkach, whom the US Treasury has designated as a longtime Kremlin agent. Mr Giuliani has acknowledged trying dig up dirt on the Bidens in Ukraine. But the US Director of National Intelligence, John Ratcliffe, told Fox Business that the purported emails were not connected to a Russian disinformation effort. Other US media say they have been unable to verify the authenticity of the emails. Hunter has neither confirmed nor denied that he dropped off a laptop at the location. Hunter joined Burisma in 2014, and remained on the board until April 2019, when he decided to leave. Speaking to the BBC, he said Burisma had seen his name "as gold" and that it had played a large part in his appointment to the board. Twitter and Facebook's action over Joe Biden article reignites bias claims What are the Bidens accused of in Ukraine? Donald Trump and his allies accused Joe Biden of wrongdoing because he had pushed, while vice-president, for the Ukrainian government to fire its top prosecutor, who was investigating the company for which Hunter worked. In 2016, Joe Biden called for the dismissal of Ukrainian prosecutor Viktor Shokin, whose office had Burisma and other companies under investigation. However, other Western leaders and major bodies that give financial support to Ukraine also wanted the prosecutor dismissed because they believed he was not active enough in tackling corruption. What else has the Biden campaign said? Shortly before the final presidential debate last year, the Democrat's camp released a statement denying wrongdoing. "Joe Biden has never even considered being involved in business with his family, nor in any overseas business whatsoever," said the statement. "He has never held stock in any such business arrangements nor has any family member or any other person ever held stock for him. "What is true is that Tony Bobulinski admitted on the record to Breitbart that he is angry that he was *not* able to go into business with Hunter and James Biden [Joe Biden's brother]." What did this have to do with impeachment? In 2019, details emerged of a phone call Mr Trump, the then president, had made to the president of Ukraine, in which he had urged the Ukrainian leader to investigate the Bidens. President Trump's impeachment explained This led to charges by the Democrats that Mr Trump was trying to illegally pressure Ukraine to help damage his election rival, resulting in impeachment by the House of Representatives. Mr Trump denied he had done anything wrong, and he was later acquitted by the Republican-controlled US Senate. Getty Images President Trump holds a copy of The Washington Post the day after the US Senate acquitted him on two articles of impeachment Has anything been proven against the Bidens? While no criminal activity has been proven, it has raised questions about potential conflicts of interest. A senior State Department official raised such concerns as far back as 2015. Joe Biden's son defends foreign dealings US Republican lawmakers launched an investigation and found last year that Hunter's work for the Ukrainian firm had been "problematic" - but there wasn't evidence that US foreign policy was influenced by it. No criminal charges were proven against Burisma either. The company issued a statement in 2017 saying "all legal proceedings and pending criminal allegations" against it were closed. Last year, Yuriy Lutsenko, the prosecutor in Ukraine who succeeded Viktor Shokin, told the BBC that there was no reason to investigate the Bidens under Ukrainian law. There is nothing illegal about sitting on a board of a company whilst family members serve in government. Hunter Biden's lawyers said in statement in October 2019 that he had undertaken "these business activities independently. He did not believe it appropriate to discuss them with his father, nor did he." Hunter told the New Yorker magazine that on the only occasion he had mentioned Burisma: "Dad said, 'I hope you know what you are doing.'" Amid all the scrutiny, Joe Biden promised last year that if he was elected president, no-one in his family would hold a job or have a business relationship with a foreign corporation or foreign government. Impeachment of Donald Trump US election 2020 BBC Verify Hunter Biden Joe Biden Related Jeremy Bowen: Trump-Zelensky row signals looming crisis between Europe and US 1 Mar 2025 World 'The boss' featured at Trump hush-money trial 25 Apr 2024 US & Canada How did US impeachments go from rare to routine? 28 Sep 2023 US & Canada More 7 mins ago Trump appeasing Putin with pressure on Ukraine, Biden tells BBC In his first interview since leaving office, the 82-year-old criticises his successor's handling of the war and is challenged on his own record. 7 mins ago World 8 mins ago Watch: Biden's first interview since leaving the White House Former US President Joe Biden talks Trump, Russia and US-Europe relations with the BBC's Today programme. 8 mins ago US & Canada 2 days ago Trump's former VP Mike Pence receives JFK Courage Award Pence defied calls by Donald Trump to overturn the result of the 2020 election, and was shunned by Republicans as a result. 2 days ago US & Canada 25 Apr 2025 What would it mean for Ukraine to temporarily give up land? As Ukraine reckons with the terms of a possible peace deal, BBC Verify asks what it could mean in practice. 25 Apr 2025 BBC Verify 16 Apr 2025 Watch: Biden attacks Trump in first speech since leaving White House The former US president says his successor has "done so much damage and so much destruction" in his first days in office. 16 Apr 2025 US & Canada British Broadcasting Corporation Home News Sport Business Innovation Culture Arts Travel Earth Audio Video Live Weather BBC Shop BritBox BBC in other languages Follow BBC on: Terms of Use About the BBC Privacy Policy Cookies Accessibility Help Contact the BBC Advertise with us Do not share or sell my info Contact technical support Copyright 2025 BBC. All rights reserved. The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites. Read about our approach to external linking.Hunter Biden: What was he doing in China and Ukraine? Skip to content British Broadcasting Corporation Home News Sport Business Innovation Culture Arts Travel Earth Audio Video Live Home News Israel-Gaza War War in Ukraine US & Canada UK UK Politics England N. Ireland N. Ireland Politics Scotland Scotland Politics Wales Wales Politics Africa Asia China India Australia Europe Latin America Middle East In Pictures BBC InDepth BBC Verify Sport Business Executive Lounge Technology of Business Future of Business Innovation Technology Science & Health Artificial Intelligence AI v the Mind Culture Film & TV Music Art & Design Style Books Entertainment News Arts Arts in Motion Travel Destinations Africa Antarctica Asia Australia and Pacific Caribbean & Bermuda Central America Europe Middle East North America South America World’s Table Culture & Experiences Adventures The SpeciaList Earth Natural Wonders Weather & Science Climate Solutions Sustainable Business Green Living Audio Podcasts Radio Audio FAQs Video Live Live News Live Sport Home News Sport Business Innovation Culture Arts Travel Earth Audio Video Live Weather Newsletters Hunter Biden: What was he doing in China and Ukraine? 6 April 2021 Share Save Share Save Getty Images Vice-President Biden in 2016 with his son Hunter looking on Hunter Biden, second son of US President Joe Biden, is being investigated by the Justice Department over his finances including, according to US media reports, some of his business dealings in China. During the 2020 election campaign, he and his father were frequently accused by Donald Trump and his associates of wrongdoing in regards to China and Ukraine, allegations which they both denied. The New York Post reported on an alleged email in which an adviser from a Ukrainian energy company, Burisma, apparently thanked Hunter for inviting him to meet his father, Joe Biden. Asked about the allegations, Joe Biden told a reporter it was a "smear campaign". No criminal activity has been proven, and no evidence has emerged that Mr Biden did anything to intentionally benefit his son. In an interview with the BBC months after his father was sworn in as president, Hunter Biden defended his qualifications for the position at Burisma but added that, in retrospect, he had "missed... the perception that I would create". Claims of influence-peddling are common in Washington DC and Mr Trump's children have also been accused of conflicts of interest in lucrative business deals overseas. They, too, deny wrongdoing. What do we know about the federal investigation? The Justice Department is investigating Hunter Biden's finances including scrutinising some of his past Chinese business dealings and other transactions, a "person familiar with the matter" told The Associated Press in December . The tax investigation was launched in 2018 but Hunter Biden said he had learned about it for the first time in December 2020. Asked about the investigation by US broadcaster CBS this April, the president's son said: "I'm co-operating, completely. And I'm absolutely certain, 100% certain, that at the end of the investigation, that I will be cleared of any wrongdoing." What have the Bidens been accused of in China? The New York Post cited a purported email from Hunter Biden in August 2017 indicating he was receiving a $10m annual fee from a Chinese billionaire for "introductions alone", though it is unclear who was involved in the alleged introductions. Another purported email, which Fox News said it had confirmed, reportedly refers to a deal pursued by Hunter involving China's largest private energy firm. It is said to include a cryptic mention of "10 held by H for the big guy". Fox News cited unnamed sources as saying "the big guy" in the purported email was a reference to Joe Biden. This message is said to be from May 2017. Both emails would date from when the former US vice-president was a private citizen. A former business associate of Hunter Biden has come forward to say he can confirm the allegations. Tony Bobulinski told Fox News that, contrary to Joe Biden's statements that he had nothing to do with his son's business affairs, Hunter had "frequently referenced asking him for his sign-off or advice on various potential deals" in China. Mr Bobulinski, who is reportedly a US Navy veteran, separately told Fox News' Tucker Carlson that he had met on two occasions with Joe Biden to discuss business deals with China, the first time in May 2017 when Barack Obama's former vice-president was a private citizen. He says he asked Joe Biden's brother, James, whether the family was concerned about possible scrutiny of the former vice-president's involvement in a potential business deal with a Chinese entity. Mr Bobulinski told Fox News that James Biden had replied: "Plausible deniability." Mr Bobulinski was invited by Mr Trump to be his guest at the final presidential debate in Nashville, Tennessee on 22 October. What is known about Hunter's dealings in China? In 2013, Hunter flew aboard Air Force Two with his father, who was then vice-president, on an official visit to Beijing, where the younger Biden met investment banker Jonathan Li. Hunter told the New Yorker he had just met Mr Li for "a cup of coffee", but 12 days after the trip a private equity fund, BHR Partners, was approved by the Chinese authorities. Mr Li was chief executive and Hunter was a board member. He would hold a 10% stake. Getty Images Joe Biden walks out of Air Force Two with his granddaughter and son, Hunter Biden BHR is backed by some of China's largest state banks and by local governments, according to US media. Hunter Biden's lawyer said he had joined the board in an unpaid position "based on his interest in seeking ways to bring Chinese capital to international markets". His lawyer also said his client did not acquire his financial stake in BHR until 2017, after his father had left office in the US. Hunter resigned from the board of BHR in April 2020, but still held his 10% stake in BHR as of July this year, according to the company report. What did the New York Post say about Hunter Biden and Ukraine? The New York Post reported an email from April 2015, in which an adviser to Burisma, Vadym Pozharskyi, apparently thanked Hunter Biden for inviting him to meet his father in Washington. Hunter was a director on the board of Burisma - a Ukrainian-owned private energy company while his father was the Obama administration's pointman on US-Ukrainian relations. Hunter was one of several foreigners on its board. The New York Post article did not provide evidence that the meeting had ever taken place. The Biden election campaign said there was no record of any such meeting on the former vice-president's "official schedule" from the time. But in a statement to Politico , the campaign also acknowledged that Mr Biden could have had an "informal interaction" with the Burisma adviser that did not appear on his official schedule, though it said any such encounter would have been "cursory". "Investigations by the press, during impeachment, and even by two Republican-led Senate committees whose work was decried as 'not legitimate' and political by a GOP colleague, have all reached the same conclusion: that Joe Biden carried out official US policy toward Ukraine and engaged in no wrongdoing," said Andrew Bates, a spokesman for Mr Biden. What we know about Biden-Ukraine corruption claims Mr Biden's team has also decried the New York Post story as "Russian disinformation", though it did not say the emails were bogus. The New York Post article was shared by President Trump and his allies. Two of his former advisers, Steve Bannon and Rudy Giuliani, were involved in providing the story and the hard drive containing the alleged emails, to the newspaper. Mr Giuliani says the messages were found on a laptop that Hunter dropped off at a Delaware repair shop in April 2019. Sceptics have noted that Mr Giuliani travelled in December 2019 to Kyiv where he met Ukrainian lawmaker Andriy Derkach, whom the US Treasury has designated as a longtime Kremlin agent. Mr Giuliani has acknowledged trying dig up dirt on the Bidens in Ukraine. But the US Director of National Intelligence, John Ratcliffe, told Fox Business that the purported emails were not connected to a Russian disinformation effort. Other US media say they have been unable to verify the authenticity of the emails. Hunter has neither confirmed nor denied that he dropped off a laptop at the location. Hunter joined Burisma in 2014, and remained on the board until April 2019, when he decided to leave. Speaking to the BBC, he said Burisma had seen his name "as gold" and that it had played a large part in his appointment to the board. Twitter and Facebook's action over Joe Biden article reignites bias claims What are the Bidens accused of in Ukraine? Donald Trump and his allies accused Joe Biden of wrongdoing because he had pushed, while vice-president, for the Ukrainian government to fire its top prosecutor, who was investigating the company for which Hunter worked. In 2016, Joe Biden called for the dismissal of Ukrainian prosecutor Viktor Shokin, whose office had Burisma and other companies under investigation. However, other Western leaders and major bodies that give financial support to Ukraine also wanted the prosecutor dismissed because they believed he was not active enough in tackling corruption. What else has the Biden campaign said? Shortly before the final presidential debate last year, the Democrat's camp released a statement denying wrongdoing. "Joe Biden has never even considered being involved in business with his family, nor in any overseas business whatsoever," said the statement. "He has never held stock in any such business arrangements nor has any family member or any other person ever held stock for him. "What is true is that Tony Bobulinski admitted on the record to Breitbart that he is angry that he was *not* able to go into business with Hunter and James Biden [Joe Biden's brother]." What did this have to do with impeachment? In 2019, details emerged of a phone call Mr Trump, the then president, had made to the president of Ukraine, in which he had urged the Ukrainian leader to investigate the Bidens. President Trump's impeachment explained This led to charges by the Democrats that Mr Trump was trying to illegally pressure Ukraine to help damage his election rival, resulting in impeachment by the House of Representatives. Mr Trump denied he had done anything wrong, and he was later acquitted by the Republican-controlled US Senate. Getty Images President Trump holds a copy of The Washington Post the day after the US Senate acquitted him on two articles of impeachment Has anything been proven against the Bidens? While no criminal activity has been proven, it has raised questions about potential conflicts of interest. A senior State Department official raised such concerns as far back as 2015. Joe Biden's son defends foreign dealings US Republican lawmakers launched an investigation and found last year that Hunter's work for the Ukrainian firm had been "problematic" - but there wasn't evidence that US foreign policy was influenced by it. No criminal charges were proven against Burisma either. The company issued a statement in 2017 saying "all legal proceedings and pending criminal allegations" against it were closed. Last year, Yuriy Lutsenko, the prosecutor in Ukraine who succeeded Viktor Shokin, told the BBC that there was no reason to investigate the Bidens under Ukrainian law. There is nothing illegal about sitting on a board of a company whilst family members serve in government. Hunter Biden's lawyers said in statement in October 2019 that he had undertaken "these business activities independently. He did not believe it appropriate to discuss them with his father, nor did he." Hunter told the New Yorker magazine that on the only occasion he had mentioned Burisma: "Dad said, 'I hope you know what you are doing.'" Amid all the scrutiny, Joe Biden promised last year that if he was elected president, no-one in his family would hold a job or have a business relationship with a foreign corporation or foreign government. Impeachment of Donald Trump US election 2020 BBC Verify Hunter Biden Joe Biden Related Jeremy Bowen: Trump-Zelensky row signals looming crisis between Europe and US 1 Mar 2025 World 'The boss' featured at Trump hush-money trial 25 Apr 2024 US & Canada How did US impeachments go from rare to routine? 28 Sep 2023 US & Canada More 47 mins ago Joe Biden on Trump: 'What president ever talks like that? That's not who we are' Exclusive: The former president tells Nick Robinson his verdict on his successor's first 100 days and his "grave concern" for the future of the Atlantic Alliance 47 mins ago BBC InDepth 53 mins ago Trump appeasing Putin with pressure on Ukraine, Biden tells BBC In his first interview since leaving office, the 82-year-old criticises his successor's handling of the war and is challenged on his own record. 53 mins ago World 54 mins ago Watch: Biden's first interview since leaving the White House Former US President Joe Biden talks Trump, Russia and US-Europe relations with the BBC's Today programme. 54 mins ago US & Canada 2 days ago Trump's former VP Mike Pence receives JFK Courage Award Pence defied calls by Donald Trump to overturn the result of the 2020 election, and was shunned by Republicans as a result. 2 days ago US & Canada 25 Apr 2025 What would it mean for Ukraine to temporarily give up land? As Ukraine reckons with the terms of a possible peace deal, BBC Verify asks what it could mean in practice. 25 Apr 2025 BBC Verify British Broadcasting Corporation Home News Sport Business Innovation Culture Arts Travel Earth Audio Video Live Weather BBC Shop BritBox BBC in other languages Follow BBC on: Terms of Use About the BBC Privacy Policy Cookies Accessibility Help Contact the BBC Advertise with us Do not share or sell my info Contact technical support Copyright 2025 BBC. All rights reserved. The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites. Read about our approach to external linking.The Bidens’ Influence Peddling Timeline - United States House Committee on Oversight and Accountability Skip to main content Toggle navigation Search About Chairman James Comer Full Committee Rules Committee Activity Calendar Hearings Letters Markups Reports Forums Subcommittees Cybersecurity, Information Technology, and Government Innovation Economic Growth, Energy Policy, and Regulatory Affairs Government Operations Health Care and Financial Services Military and Foreign Affairs Federal Law Enforcement Delivering on Government Efficiency Task Force on the Declassification of Federal Secrets Media Center Press Releases The Overview Biden Family Investigation The Bidens’ Influence Peddling Timeline Biden's Border Crisis COVID Origins Blow the Whistle The Bidens’ Influence Peddling Timeline Since taking the gavel in January, the Committee on Oversight and Accountability has accelerated its investigation of the Biden family’s domestic and international business practices to determine whether the Biden family has been targeted by foreign actors, President Biden is compromised, and our national security is threatened. Records obtained through the Committee’s subpoenas to date reveal that the Bidens and their associates have received over $20 million in payments from foreign entities. Below is a timeline that details key dates in our investigation. The main points of interest are: 1) Romania: On September 28, 2015, Vice President Biden welcomed Romanian President Klaus Iohannis to the White House. Within five weeks of this meeting, a Romanian businessman involved with a high-profile corruption prosecution in Romania, Gabriel Popoviciu, began depositing a Biden associate’s bank account, which ultimately made their way into Biden family accounts. Popoviciu made sixteen of the seventeen payments, totaling over $3 million, to the Biden associate account while Joe Biden was Vice President. Biden family accounts ultimately received approximately $1.038 million. The total amount from Romania to the Biden family and their associates is over $3 million. 2) China- CEFC: On March 1, 2017—less than two months after Vice President Joe Biden left public office—State Energy HK Limited, a Chinese company, wired $3 million to a Biden associate’s account. This is the same bank account used in the above “Romania” section. After the Chinese company wired the Biden associate account the $3 million, the Biden family received approximately $1,065,692 over a three-month period in different bank accounts. Additionally, the CEFC Chairman gives Hunter Biden a diamond worth $80,000. Lastly, CEFC creates a joint venture with the Bidens in the summer of 2017. The timeline lays out the “WhatsApp” messages and subsequent wires from the Chinese to the Bidens of $100,000 and $5 million. The total amount from China, specifically with CEFC and their related entities, to the Biden family and their associates is over $8 million. 3) Kazakhstan: On April 22, 2014, Kenes Rakishev, a Kazakhstani oligarch used his Singaporean entity, Novatus Holdings, to wire one of Hunter Biden’s Rosemont Seneca entities $142,300. The very next day—April 23, 2014—the Rosemont Seneca entity transferred the exact same amount of money to a car dealership for a car for Hunter Biden. Hunter Biden and Devon Archer would represent Burisma in Kazakhstan in May/June of 2014 as the company attempted to broker a three-way deal among Burisma, the Kazakhstan government, and a Chinese state-owned energy company. 4) Ukraine: Devon Archer joined the Burisma board of directors in spring of 2014 and was joined by Hunter Biden shortly thereafter. Hunter Biden joined the company as counsel, but after a meeting with Burisma owner Mykola Zlochevsky in Lake Como, Italy, was elevated to the board of directors in the spring of 2014. Both Biden and Archer were each paid $1 million per year for their positions on the board of directors. In December 2015, after a Burisma board of directors meeting, Zlochevsky and Hunter Biden “called D.C.” in the wake of mounting pressures the company was facing. Zlochevsky was later charged with bribing Ukrainian officials with $6 million in an attempt to delay or drop the investigation into his company. The total amount from Ukraine to the Biden family and their associates is $6.5 million. 5) Russia: On February 14, 2014, a Russian oligarch and Russia’s richest woman, Yelena Baturina, wired a Rosemont Seneca entity $3.5 million. On March 11, 2014, the wire was split up: $750,000 was transferred to Devon Archer, and the remainder was sent to Rosemont Seneca Bohai, a company Devon Archer and Hunter Biden split equally. In spring of 2014, Yelena Baturina joined Hunter Biden and Devon Archer to share a meal with then-Vice President Biden at a restaurant in Washington, D.C. The total amount from Russia to the Biden family and their associates is $3.5 million. Beyond this timeline, here are links to our First , Second , Third , and Fourth Bank Memorandums that provide detailed descriptions and show actual bank records and wires. Biden Family Timeline China – BHR China- CEFC Hunter Biden Criminal Investigation Kazakhstan Romania Russia Ukraine 2009 January 20, 2009 Important Date Obama-Biden Administration begins. 2013 November 1, 2013 China – BHR Hunter Biden, business associate, and Chinese investors agree to create Bohai Harvest RST Equity Investment Fund Management Co., Ltd. (BHR), an investment fund controlled by the Bank of China, to focus on mergers and acquisitions, and investment in and reforms of state-owned enterprise. December 4, 2013 China – BHR Vice President Biden travels with Hunter Biden on Air Force 2 to China and meets CEO of BHR, Jonathan Li. Shortly thereafter, BHR’s business license was approved and Hunter Biden was a board member. 2014 February 5, 2014 Kazakhstan Hunter Biden met Kazakhstani oligarch Kenes Rakishev at the Hay Adams Hotel in Washington, D.C. In email correspondences with Devon Archer surrounding the meeting, Rakishev requested Secretary of State John Kerry visit Kazakhstan. Archer replied, “if we have some business started as planned I will ensure its planned soonest.” Rakishev is a Kazakhstani oligarch and millionaire and was a director at Kazakhstan’s state-owned oil company KazMunayGas. Rakishev maintained close ties to Karim Massimov, who became prime minister on April 2, 2014. February 14, 2014 Russia Russian oligarch Yelena Baturina – the wealthiest woman in Russia and then married to the former mayor of Moscow—wired the Rosemont Seneca Thornton bank account $3.5 million. Rosemont Seneca Thornton’s beneficiary was Rosemont Seneca Partners, of which Hunter Biden was the chairman. March 11, 2014 Russia Rosemont Seneca Thornton transferred $2,752,711 to a Rosemont Seneca Bohai bank account. Also on March 11, 2014, $750,000 of the original wire from Baturina was sent to Devon Archer from Rosemont Seneca Thornton. Rosemont Seneca Bohai was an entity used by both Hunter Biden and Devon Archer. In his testimony to the Committee, Archer confirmed that he and Hunter Biden were 50-50 owners in Rosemont Seneca Bohai. Rosemont Seneca Bohai was opened in Delaware on February 13, 2014—the day before the $3.5 million wire from Yelena Baturina. The bank records can be found in the third bank records memo. April 1, 2014 Russia and Kazakhstan In the spring of 2014, after Yelena Baturina sent the $3.5 million wire to Rosemont Seneca Thornton and around the same time that Kenes Rakishev wired money to Rosemont Seneca Bohai for Hunter Biden’s sportscar, Vice President Biden attended dinner with Yelena Baturina, Kenes Rakishev, Karim Massimov, Hunter Biden, Devon Archer, and others at Café Milano in Washington, D.C. Joe Biden stayed for dinner. Devon Archer provided this information during his transcribed interview . April 15, 2014 Ukraine Burisma, a Ukrainian energy company, appoints Biden business associate to their board of directors. April 22, 2014 Kazakhstan Kenes Rakishev’s Singaporean company wires $142,300 through his Latvian company to a Rosemont entity. The details can be found in the third bank records memorandum . April 22, 2014 Ukraine Vice President Biden travels to Ukraine and gives an anti-corruption speech. April 23, 2014 Kazakhstan The Rosemont entity wires $142,300 to a car dealership in New Jersey for a new sports car for Hunter Biden. The details can be found in the third bank records memorandum . May 12, 2014 Ukraine Burisma announces Hunter Biden joined its board of directors. May 21, 2014 Romania Vice President Biden visits Romania and delivers a speech to the Romanian Prime Minister, judges, prosecutors, and leaders of the Romanian Parliament. September 12, 2014 China – BHR BHR invests $1.7 billion in CCP-linked petroleum and chemical company. December 9, 2014 China – BHR Hunter Biden and business associate invest $484,920 into BHR. December 22, 2014 Kazakhstan Kenes Rakishev’s Kazakhstani oil company and Burisma join with a CCP-linked company and announce a transnational financial arrangement. 2015 April 16, 2015 Ukraine and Kazakhstan On April 16, 2015, Vice President Joe Biden attended a dinner with Karim Massimov, Vadym Pozharsky, Hunter Biden, Devon Archer, and others at Café Milano in Washington, D.C. Devon Archer provided this information during his transcribed interview . September 15, 2015 China – BHR BHR joins with a CCP-linked entity to acquire US-based Henniges Automotive in a deal reportedly worth $600 million. September 28, 2015 Romania Vice President Biden welcomes Romanian President Klaus Iohannis to the White House. A readout of the meeting states, the “Vice President welcomed President Iohannis’ focus on anti-corruption efforts and rule of law as a means to strengthen national security and promote greater investment and economic growth.” President Iohannis said the Vice President “voiced satisfaction over Romania’s progress with the fight against corruption.” November 2, 2015 Ukraine Vadym Pozharskyi suggests high level U.S. level officials come to Ukraine and talk with Prosecutor General Viktor Shokin and President Petro Poroshenko about Mykola Zlochevsky’s investigations. Prosecutor General Shokin was investigating Burisma and Burisma’s owner, Zlochevsky for fraud. Prosecutor General Shokin is the Ukranian government official Vice President Biden demanded Poroshenko fire. November 5, 2015 Romania Romanian businessman, Gabriel Popoviciu, begins making deposits into Robinson Walker, LLC’s bank account. Robinson Walker, LLC is an entity owned by a Biden associate, Rob Walker. Popoviciu’s company sent Robinson Walker the first wire for $179,836.86. From November 2015 to May 2017, Popoviciu’s company paid Robinson Walker, LLC over $3 million. Biden family accounts received approximately $1.038 million from the Robinson Walker, LLC account after Popoviciu’s deposits. Sixteen of the seventeen payments from Popoviciu’s company to Robinson Walker, LLC were made while Joe Biden was Vice President. Details can be found in the Second Bank Records Memorandum . November 6, 2015 Ukraine Amos Hochstein, a high level U.S. government offical working in the Obama-Biden Administration, meets with Hunter Biden and discusses Burisma. November 9, 2015 Romania Rob Walker’s account wires Hunter Biden $59,900. Details can be found in the Second Bank Records Memorandum. November 11, 2015 Ukraine Amos Hochstein meets with Vice President Biden in the West Wing. November 12, 2015 Ukraine Amos Hochstein calls Hunter Biden. November 13, 2015 Romania Hunter Biden meets with the U.S. Ambassador to Romania. November 13, 2015 Ukraine VP Biden touched down in Ukraine last night. Read his initial notes from the road: https://t.co/FdPysDjiqT pic.twitter.com/ybZFp7frYe — VP Biden (Archived) (@VP44) December 7, 2015 Vice President Biden announces trip to Ukraine to take place the first week of December 2015. November 14, 2015 Ukraine Vadym Pozharskyi emails Hunter Biden confirmation that the Vice President will be traveling to Ukraine. November 14, 2015 Romania Hunter Biden meets with the Ambassador of Romania to the United States. November 15, 2015 Romania Hunter Biden travels to Romania. December 4, 2015 Ukraine Mykola Zlochevsky and Vadym Pozharsky complain about constant “government pressures” and urge Hunter Biden to call the Vice President of the United States, Joe Biden. Devon Archer testified that Hunter Biden, Zlochevsky, and Pozharsky “called D.C.” Devon Archer provided this information during his transcribed interview . December 7, 2015 China – CEFC Hunter Biden and CEFC Chairman Ye Jianming begin communicating regarding a possible U.S. partnership. December 7, 2015 Romania Robinson Walker, LLC wires Hunter Biden $59,725. Details can be found in the Second Bank Records Memorandum. December 7, 2015 Ukraine https://oversight.house.gov/wp-content/uploads/2023/07/Biden-Firing-Ukraine-Prosecutor-Clip.mp4 Vice President Biden arrives in Ukraine, where he demands Prosecutor General Shokin be fired if Ukraine wants $1 billion in International Monetary Fund (IMF) loans. December 9, 2015 Ukraine Vice President Biden departs Ukraine and gets a commitment from President Poroshenko that Prosecutor General Shokin will be fired. December 17, 2015 Ukraine Vice President Biden hosts a holiday party at the Vice Presidential residence, which Amos Hochstein and Hunter Biden both attend. December 23, 2015 Romania Robinson Walker, LLC wires Hunter Biden $60,091.24. Details can be found in the Second Bank Records Memorandum . 2016 January 20, 2016 Ukraine Vice President Biden meets with President Poroshenko in Switzerland at the World Economic Forum where Biden reinforced the linkage between the loan guarantee and the necessary reforms. February 4, 2016 Ukraine Mykola Zlochevsky gives Hunter Biden unspecified, extravagant birthday gifts. February 11, 2016 Ukraine Vice President Biden and President Poroshenko conduct a call. February 12, 2016 Romania Robinson Walker, LLC wires Hunter Biden’s Owasco P.C. $61,126.24. Details can be found in the Second Bank Records Memorandum. February 16, 2016 Ukraine President Poroshenko asks Prosecutor General Shokin to resign. February 18, 2016 Ukraine Vice President Biden calls President Poroshenko to thank him for calling on Prosecutor General Shokin to resign. February 19, 2016 Ukraine President Poroshenko says he recieved Prosecutor General Shokin’s letter of resignation. March 24, 2016 Romania Robinson Walker, LLC wires Owasco P.C. $61,816.05. Details can be found in the Second Bank Records Memorandum. March 29, 2016 Romania Hunter Biden meets again with U.S. Ambassador to Romania. March 29, 2016 Ukraine Ukranian Parliament approves President Poroshenko’s firing of Prosecutor General Shokin. May 23, 2016 Romania Robinson Walker, LLC wires Owasco P.C. $123,830.80. Details can be found in the Second Bank Records Memorandum. May 23, 2016 Romania Robinson Walker, LLC wires Owasco P.C. $53,419.74. Details can be found in the Second Bank Records Memorandum. July 11, 2016 Romania Robinson Walker, LLC wires Owasco P.C. $116,860.93. Details can be found in the Second Bank Records Memorandum. Load More Share via Email About Chairman James Comer Full Committee Rules Committee Activity Calendar Hearings Letters Markups Reports Forums Subcommittees Cybersecurity, Information Technology, and Government Innovation Economic Growth, Energy Policy, and Regulatory Affairs Government Operations Health Care and Financial Services Military and Foreign Affairs Federal Law Enforcement Delivering on Government Efficiency Task Force on the Declassification of Federal Secrets Media Center Press Releases The Overview Biden Family Investigation The Bidens’ Influence Peddling Timeline Biden's Border Crisis COVID Origins Blow the Whistle Minority © 2025 Committee on Oversight and Government Reform Privacy Policy 2157 Rayburn House Office Building Washington, DC 20515 Phone: (202) 225-5074 Fax: (202) 225-3974 Search About Chairman James Comer Full Committee Rules Committee Activity Calendar Hearings Letters Markups Reports Forums Subcommittees Cybersecurity, Information Technology, and Government Innovation Economic Growth, Energy Policy, and Regulatory Affairs Government Operations Health Care and Financial Services Military and Foreign Affairs Federal Law Enforcement Delivering on Government Efficiency Task Force on the Declassification of Federal Secrets Media Center Press Releases The Overview Biden Family Investigation The Bidens’ Influence Peddling Timeline Biden's Border Crisis COVID Origins Blow the WhistlePresident Donald J. Trump Achieved the Biggest Tax Cuts and Reforms in American History – The White House Skip to content This is historical material “frozen in time”. The website is no longer updated and links to external websites and some internal pages may not work. Open Menu WhiteHouse.gov WhiteHouse.gov Copy URL to your clipboard Share Economy National Security Budget Immigration Energy Search WhiteHouse.gov Open Search Fact Sheets President Donald J. Trump Achieved the Biggest Tax Cuts and Reforms in American History Budget & Spending Issued on: February 5, 2018 Share: Share on Facebook Share on Twitter Copy URL to your clipboard All News Quote And just as I promised the American people from this podium 11 months ago, we enacted the biggest tax cuts and reforms in American history. Our massive tax cuts provide tremendous relief for the middle class and small business. President Donald J. Trump BIGGEST TAX CUTS AND REFORMS: Because of President Donald J. Trump, Americans will benefit from the biggest tax cuts and reforms in American history. President Trump’s tax cuts are the biggest gross tax cuts in American history, cutting over $5.5 trillion in taxes over ten years. The President’s tax law included substantial reforms to make taxes simpler and fairer, which helped offset the cost of the tax cuts and thereby limit the net tax cut to $1.5 trillion. President Trump cut the corporate tax rate from 35 percent to 21 percent, the largest percentage point reduction of the top marginal rate in history. President Trump’s tax cuts include the biggest increase in the child tax credit in history. The Child Tax Credit was increased by $573.4 billion over ten years, larger than any previous change to credits specifically targeting families. President Trump’s tax cuts included some of the most substantial reforms to the tax code in American history. The Tax Cuts and Jobs Act will help end the offshoring of corporate money by transitioning the country to a territorial system of corporate taxation and creating anti-abuse rules for multinationals that artificially shift profits offshore. The Tax Cuts and Jobs Act nearly doubles the standard deduction, to simplify tax filing. The Tax Cuts and Jobs Act limits itemized deductions, while maintaining the most popular deductions, such as the mortgage interest deduction and charitable giving deduction. The Tax Cuts and Jobs Act facilitates school choice by allowing families to use 529 college savings plans for elementary and secondary education expense and spend up to $10,000 annually on private school tuition and related expenses, in addition to the uses previously allowed. The first new community development tax incentive program enacted since the Clinton administration, providing an opportunity for mainstream private investors to support businesses and distressed communities with the creation of Opportunity Zones. The Tax Cuts and Jobs Act repeals the individual mandate, marking the single largest legislative blow to Obamacare since the law was passed. This individual mandate is particularly painful for low and middle-income Americans: 79 percent of people who paid the penalty in 2016 had household income below $50,000. The tax law’s repeal of the individual mandate relieves Americans from the unprecedented assault on liberty, where the Federal Government fined Americans for not purchasing something. As a combination of tax cuts and tax reform, the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act was therefore the biggest legislative action reforming our tax code in history. AMERICAN COMPANIES ARE DELIVERING: Businesses throughout the country are responding to President Trump’s tax cuts by rewarding American workers. Since President Trump provided his historic tax cuts and reforms, more than 3.5 million American workers across more than 300 companies have received bonuses, raises, and increased. Many companies have also announced new investments and new hiring. Best Buy has announced it is giving a $1,000 bonus to full-time employees and a $500 bonus to part-time employees, in addition to investing $20 million to expand technology development centers across the United States. Quest Diagnostics is giving a bonus of up to $500 to nearly 40,000 employees and investing $75 million of its tax savings back into the company and employees. Discover announced it would raise its minimum wage to $15.25 an hour and had paid a $1,000 bonus to more than 15,000 non-executive employees. Hostess Brands is providing employees with a $750 cash bonus and $500 contribution to their 401(k) accounts, in addition to providing a year’s worth of free Hostess products. Cigna announced that it was increasing its minimum wage in the United States to $16 an hour and adding $30 million to its 401(k) program to match additional contributions, benefitting more than 30,000 employees. Lowe’s announced it was giving a bonus of up to $1,000 to employees and expanding its benefits package for full-time workers to include 10 weeks of maternity leave, two weeks of parental leave, and adoption assistance. BUILDING ON OUR ECONOMIC MOMENTUM: President Trump’s tax cuts are expanding on a strong economy that continues to benefit American workers. Average hourly wages increased by 2.9 percent last year, the largest increase in 8 years. 200,000 jobs were added in January, while the unemployment rate remained at its lowest level in 17 years, 4.1 percent. Manufacturing expanded in January at near the fastest pace since 2004, according to the Institute for Supply Management data. Recent polling shows Americans are satisfied with the state of the U.S. economy, with the percentage of those polled with positive views of the economy at a 17-year high. Consumer optimism increased in January according to The Conference Board’s Consumer Confidence Survey. Consumers are confident that the strong pace of growth seen in late 2017 will continue in 2018. According to the UBS Investor Watch Quarterly, which surveys business owner sentiment, optimism has soared since the passage of tax reform. UBS found that positive economic outlook among business owners has grown by 18 percentage points between quarter four of 2017 and quarter one of 2018. UBS found that 79 percent of the businesses owners surveyed were satisfied with the tax bill and 72 percent believed it would boost the economy. WhiteHouse.gov The White House Twitter Facebook Instagram YouTube President Donald J. Trump Vice President Mike Pence First Lady Melania Trump Mrs. Karen Pence The Cabinet Administration Accomplishments News Remarks Articles Presidential Actions Briefings & Statements About The White House Economy & Jobs Budget & Spending Education Immigration National Security & Defense Healthcare Council of Economic Advisers Council of Environmental Quality National Security Council Office of Management and Budget Office of National Drug Control Policy Office of Science and Technology Policy Copyright Privacy Policy Menu News Remarks Briefings & Statements Presidential Actions Articles All News Issues Education National Security & Defense Budget & Spending Immigration Healthcare All Issues The Administration President Donald J. Trump Vice President Michael R. Pence First Lady Melania Trump Second Lady Karen Pence The Cabinet Disclosures Executive Offices Council of Economic Advisers Council on Environmental Quality National Security Council Office of Management and Budget Office of National Drug Control Policy Office of Science and Technology Policy About The White House White House Tours Past Presidents Past First Ladies The Grounds Our Government Get Involved Write or Call the White House White House Internship Program White House Fellows Contact Live Search Type Your Search Press enter to searchPresident Donald J. Trump Achieved the Biggest Tax Cuts and Reforms in American History – The White House Skip to content This is historical material “frozen in time”. The website is no longer updated and links to external websites and some internal pages may not work. Open Menu WhiteHouse.gov WhiteHouse.gov Copy URL to your clipboard Share Economy National Security Budget Immigration Energy Search WhiteHouse.gov Open Search Fact Sheets President Donald J. Trump Achieved the Biggest Tax Cuts and Reforms in American History Budget & Spending Issued on: February 5, 2018 Share: Share on Facebook Share on Twitter Copy URL to your clipboard All News Quote And just as I promised the American people from this podium 11 months ago, we enacted the biggest tax cuts and reforms in American history. Our massive tax cuts provide tremendous relief for the middle class and small business. President Donald J. Trump BIGGEST TAX CUTS AND REFORMS: Because of President Donald J. Trump, Americans will benefit from the biggest tax cuts and reforms in American history. President Trump’s tax cuts are the biggest gross tax cuts in American history, cutting over $5.5 trillion in taxes over ten years. The President’s tax law included substantial reforms to make taxes simpler and fairer, which helped offset the cost of the tax cuts and thereby limit the net tax cut to $1.5 trillion. President Trump cut the corporate tax rate from 35 percent to 21 percent, the largest percentage point reduction of the top marginal rate in history. President Trump’s tax cuts include the biggest increase in the child tax credit in history. The Child Tax Credit was increased by $573.4 billion over ten years, larger than any previous change to credits specifically targeting families. President Trump’s tax cuts included some of the most substantial reforms to the tax code in American history. The Tax Cuts and Jobs Act will help end the offshoring of corporate money by transitioning the country to a territorial system of corporate taxation and creating anti-abuse rules for multinationals that artificially shift profits offshore. The Tax Cuts and Jobs Act nearly doubles the standard deduction, to simplify tax filing. The Tax Cuts and Jobs Act limits itemized deductions, while maintaining the most popular deductions, such as the mortgage interest deduction and charitable giving deduction. The Tax Cuts and Jobs Act facilitates school choice by allowing families to use 529 college savings plans for elementary and secondary education expense and spend up to $10,000 annually on private school tuition and related expenses, in addition to the uses previously allowed. The first new community development tax incentive program enacted since the Clinton administration, providing an opportunity for mainstream private investors to support businesses and distressed communities with the creation of Opportunity Zones. The Tax Cuts and Jobs Act repeals the individual mandate, marking the single largest legislative blow to Obamacare since the law was passed. This individual mandate is particularly painful for low and middle-income Americans: 79 percent of people who paid the penalty in 2016 had household income below $50,000. The tax law’s repeal of the individual mandate relieves Americans from the unprecedented assault on liberty, where the Federal Government fined Americans for not purchasing something. As a combination of tax cuts and tax reform, the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act was therefore the biggest legislative action reforming our tax code in history. AMERICAN COMPANIES ARE DELIVERING: Businesses throughout the country are responding to President Trump’s tax cuts by rewarding American workers. Since President Trump provided his historic tax cuts and reforms, more than 3.5 million American workers across more than 300 companies have received bonuses, raises, and increased. Many companies have also announced new investments and new hiring. Best Buy has announced it is giving a $1,000 bonus to full-time employees and a $500 bonus to part-time employees, in addition to investing $20 million to expand technology development centers across the United States. Quest Diagnostics is giving a bonus of up to $500 to nearly 40,000 employees and investing $75 million of its tax savings back into the company and employees. Discover announced it would raise its minimum wage to $15.25 an hour and had paid a $1,000 bonus to more than 15,000 non-executive employees. Hostess Brands is providing employees with a $750 cash bonus and $500 contribution to their 401(k) accounts, in addition to providing a year’s worth of free Hostess products. Cigna announced that it was increasing its minimum wage in the United States to $16 an hour and adding $30 million to its 401(k) program to match additional contributions, benefitting more than 30,000 employees. Lowe’s announced it was giving a bonus of up to $1,000 to employees and expanding its benefits package for full-time workers to include 10 weeks of maternity leave, two weeks of parental leave, and adoption assistance. BUILDING ON OUR ECONOMIC MOMENTUM: President Trump’s tax cuts are expanding on a strong economy that continues to benefit American workers. Average hourly wages increased by 2.9 percent last year, the largest increase in 8 years. 200,000 jobs were added in January, while the unemployment rate remained at its lowest level in 17 years, 4.1 percent. Manufacturing expanded in January at near the fastest pace since 2004, according to the Institute for Supply Management data. Recent polling shows Americans are satisfied with the state of the U.S. economy, with the percentage of those polled with positive views of the economy at a 17-year high. Consumer optimism increased in January according to The Conference Board’s Consumer Confidence Survey. Consumers are confident that the strong pace of growth seen in late 2017 will continue in 2018. According to the UBS Investor Watch Quarterly, which surveys business owner sentiment, optimism has soared since the passage of tax reform. UBS found that positive economic outlook among business owners has grown by 18 percentage points between quarter four of 2017 and quarter one of 2018. UBS found that 79 percent of the businesses owners surveyed were satisfied with the tax bill and 72 percent believed it would boost the economy. WhiteHouse.gov The White House Twitter Facebook Instagram YouTube President Donald J. Trump Vice President Mike Pence First Lady Melania Trump Mrs. Karen Pence The Cabinet Administration Accomplishments News Remarks Articles Presidential Actions Briefings & Statements About The White House Economy & Jobs Budget & Spending Education Immigration National Security & Defense Healthcare Council of Economic Advisers Council of Environmental Quality National Security Council Office of Management and Budget Office of National Drug Control Policy Office of Science and Technology Policy Copyright Privacy Policy Menu News Remarks Briefings & Statements Presidential Actions Articles All News Issues Education National Security & Defense Budget & Spending Immigration Healthcare All Issues The Administration President Donald J. Trump Vice President Michael R. Pence First Lady Melania Trump Second Lady Karen Pence The Cabinet Disclosures Executive Offices Council of Economic Advisers Council on Environmental Quality National Security Council Office of Management and Budget Office of National Drug Control Policy Office of Science and Technology Policy About The White House White House Tours Past Presidents Past First Ladies The Grounds Our Government Get Involved Write or Call the White House White House Internship Program White House Fellows Contact Live Search Type Your Search Press enter to searchHunter Biden: What was he doing in China and Ukraine? Skip to content British Broadcasting Corporation Home News Sport Business Innovation Culture Arts Travel Earth Audio Video Live Home News Israel-Gaza War War in Ukraine US & Canada UK UK Politics England N. Ireland N. Ireland Politics Scotland Scotland Politics Wales Wales Politics Africa Asia China India Australia Europe Latin America Middle East In Pictures BBC InDepth BBC Verify Sport Business Executive Lounge Technology of Business Future of Business Innovation Technology Science & Health Artificial Intelligence AI v the Mind Culture Film & TV Music Art & Design Style Books Entertainment News Arts Arts in Motion Travel Destinations Africa Antarctica Asia Australia and Pacific Caribbean & Bermuda Central America Europe Middle East North America South America World’s Table Culture & Experiences Adventures The SpeciaList Earth Natural Wonders Weather & Science Climate Solutions Sustainable Business Green Living Audio Podcasts Radio Audio FAQs Video Live Live News Live Sport Home News Sport Business Innovation Culture Arts Travel Earth Audio Video Live Weather Newsletters Hunter Biden: What was he doing in China and Ukraine? 6 April 2021 Share Save Share Save Getty Images Vice-President Biden in 2016 with his son Hunter looking on Hunter Biden, second son of US President Joe Biden, is being investigated by the Justice Department over his finances including, according to US media reports, some of his business dealings in China. During the 2020 election campaign, he and his father were frequently accused by Donald Trump and his associates of wrongdoing in regards to China and Ukraine, allegations which they both denied. The New York Post reported on an alleged email in which an adviser from a Ukrainian energy company, Burisma, apparently thanked Hunter for inviting him to meet his father, Joe Biden. Asked about the allegations, Joe Biden told a reporter it was a "smear campaign". No criminal activity has been proven, and no evidence has emerged that Mr Biden did anything to intentionally benefit his son. In an interview with the BBC months after his father was sworn in as president, Hunter Biden defended his qualifications for the position at Burisma but added that, in retrospect, he had "missed... the perception that I would create". Claims of influence-peddling are common in Washington DC and Mr Trump's children have also been accused of conflicts of interest in lucrative business deals overseas. They, too, deny wrongdoing. What do we know about the federal investigation? The Justice Department is investigating Hunter Biden's finances including scrutinising some of his past Chinese business dealings and other transactions, a "person familiar with the matter" told The Associated Press in December . The tax investigation was launched in 2018 but Hunter Biden said he had learned about it for the first time in December 2020. Asked about the investigation by US broadcaster CBS this April, the president's son said: "I'm co-operating, completely. And I'm absolutely certain, 100% certain, that at the end of the investigation, that I will be cleared of any wrongdoing." What have the Bidens been accused of in China? The New York Post cited a purported email from Hunter Biden in August 2017 indicating he was receiving a $10m annual fee from a Chinese billionaire for "introductions alone", though it is unclear who was involved in the alleged introductions. Another purported email, which Fox News said it had confirmed, reportedly refers to a deal pursued by Hunter involving China's largest private energy firm. It is said to include a cryptic mention of "10 held by H for the big guy". Fox News cited unnamed sources as saying "the big guy" in the purported email was a reference to Joe Biden. This message is said to be from May 2017. Both emails would date from when the former US vice-president was a private citizen. A former business associate of Hunter Biden has come forward to say he can confirm the allegations. Tony Bobulinski told Fox News that, contrary to Joe Biden's statements that he had nothing to do with his son's business affairs, Hunter had "frequently referenced asking him for his sign-off or advice on various potential deals" in China. Mr Bobulinski, who is reportedly a US Navy veteran, separately told Fox News' Tucker Carlson that he had met on two occasions with Joe Biden to discuss business deals with China, the first time in May 2017 when Barack Obama's former vice-president was a private citizen. He says he asked Joe Biden's brother, James, whether the family was concerned about possible scrutiny of the former vice-president's involvement in a potential business deal with a Chinese entity. Mr Bobulinski told Fox News that James Biden had replied: "Plausible deniability." Mr Bobulinski was invited by Mr Trump to be his guest at the final presidential debate in Nashville, Tennessee on 22 October. What is known about Hunter's dealings in China? In 2013, Hunter flew aboard Air Force Two with his father, who was then vice-president, on an official visit to Beijing, where the younger Biden met investment banker Jonathan Li. Hunter told the New Yorker he had just met Mr Li for "a cup of coffee", but 12 days after the trip a private equity fund, BHR Partners, was approved by the Chinese authorities. Mr Li was chief executive and Hunter was a board member. He would hold a 10% stake. Getty Images Joe Biden walks out of Air Force Two with his granddaughter and son, Hunter Biden BHR is backed by some of China's largest state banks and by local governments, according to US media. Hunter Biden's lawyer said he had joined the board in an unpaid position "based on his interest in seeking ways to bring Chinese capital to international markets". His lawyer also said his client did not acquire his financial stake in BHR until 2017, after his father had left office in the US. Hunter resigned from the board of BHR in April 2020, but still held his 10% stake in BHR as of July this year, according to the company report. What did the New York Post say about Hunter Biden and Ukraine? The New York Post reported an email from April 2015, in which an adviser to Burisma, Vadym Pozharskyi, apparently thanked Hunter Biden for inviting him to meet his father in Washington. Hunter was a director on the board of Burisma - a Ukrainian-owned private energy company while his father was the Obama administration's pointman on US-Ukrainian relations. Hunter was one of several foreigners on its board. The New York Post article did not provide evidence that the meeting had ever taken place. The Biden election campaign said there was no record of any such meeting on the former vice-president's "official schedule" from the time. But in a statement to Politico , the campaign also acknowledged that Mr Biden could have had an "informal interaction" with the Burisma adviser that did not appear on his official schedule, though it said any such encounter would have been "cursory". "Investigations by the press, during impeachment, and even by two Republican-led Senate committees whose work was decried as 'not legitimate' and political by a GOP colleague, have all reached the same conclusion: that Joe Biden carried out official US policy toward Ukraine and engaged in no wrongdoing," said Andrew Bates, a spokesman for Mr Biden. What we know about Biden-Ukraine corruption claims Mr Biden's team has also decried the New York Post story as "Russian disinformation", though it did not say the emails were bogus. The New York Post article was shared by President Trump and his allies. Two of his former advisers, Steve Bannon and Rudy Giuliani, were involved in providing the story and the hard drive containing the alleged emails, to the newspaper. Mr Giuliani says the messages were found on a laptop that Hunter dropped off at a Delaware repair shop in April 2019. Sceptics have noted that Mr Giuliani travelled in December 2019 to Kyiv where he met Ukrainian lawmaker Andriy Derkach, whom the US Treasury has designated as a longtime Kremlin agent. Mr Giuliani has acknowledged trying dig up dirt on the Bidens in Ukraine. But the US Director of National Intelligence, John Ratcliffe, told Fox Business that the purported emails were not connected to a Russian disinformation effort. Other US media say they have been unable to verify the authenticity of the emails. Hunter has neither confirmed nor denied that he dropped off a laptop at the location. Hunter joined Burisma in 2014, and remained on the board until April 2019, when he decided to leave. Speaking to the BBC, he said Burisma had seen his name "as gold" and that it had played a large part in his appointment to the board. Twitter and Facebook's action over Joe Biden article reignites bias claims What are the Bidens accused of in Ukraine? Donald Trump and his allies accused Joe Biden of wrongdoing because he had pushed, while vice-president, for the Ukrainian government to fire its top prosecutor, who was investigating the company for which Hunter worked. In 2016, Joe Biden called for the dismissal of Ukrainian prosecutor Viktor Shokin, whose office had Burisma and other companies under investigation. However, other Western leaders and major bodies that give financial support to Ukraine also wanted the prosecutor dismissed because they believed he was not active enough in tackling corruption. What else has the Biden campaign said? Shortly before the final presidential debate last year, the Democrat's camp released a statement denying wrongdoing. "Joe Biden has never even considered being involved in business with his family, nor in any overseas business whatsoever," said the statement. "He has never held stock in any such business arrangements nor has any family member or any other person ever held stock for him. "What is true is that Tony Bobulinski admitted on the record to Breitbart that he is angry that he was *not* able to go into business with Hunter and James Biden [Joe Biden's brother]." What did this have to do with impeachment? In 2019, details emerged of a phone call Mr Trump, the then president, had made to the president of Ukraine, in which he had urged the Ukrainian leader to investigate the Bidens. President Trump's impeachment explained This led to charges by the Democrats that Mr Trump was trying to illegally pressure Ukraine to help damage his election rival, resulting in impeachment by the House of Representatives. Mr Trump denied he had done anything wrong, and he was later acquitted by the Republican-controlled US Senate. Getty Images President Trump holds a copy of The Washington Post the day after the US Senate acquitted him on two articles of impeachment Has anything been proven against the Bidens? While no criminal activity has been proven, it has raised questions about potential conflicts of interest. A senior State Department official raised such concerns as far back as 2015. Joe Biden's son defends foreign dealings US Republican lawmakers launched an investigation and found last year that Hunter's work for the Ukrainian firm had been "problematic" - but there wasn't evidence that US foreign policy was influenced by it. No criminal charges were proven against Burisma either. The company issued a statement in 2017 saying "all legal proceedings and pending criminal allegations" against it were closed. Last year, Yuriy Lutsenko, the prosecutor in Ukraine who succeeded Viktor Shokin, told the BBC that there was no reason to investigate the Bidens under Ukrainian law. There is nothing illegal about sitting on a board of a company whilst family members serve in government. Hunter Biden's lawyers said in statement in October 2019 that he had undertaken "these business activities independently. He did not believe it appropriate to discuss them with his father, nor did he." Hunter told the New Yorker magazine that on the only occasion he had mentioned Burisma: "Dad said, 'I hope you know what you are doing.'" Amid all the scrutiny, Joe Biden promised last year that if he was elected president, no-one in his family would hold a job or have a business relationship with a foreign corporation or foreign government. Impeachment of Donald Trump US election 2020 BBC Verify Hunter Biden Joe Biden Related Jeremy Bowen: Trump-Zelensky row signals looming crisis between Europe and US 1 Mar 2025 World 'The boss' featured at Trump hush-money trial 25 Apr 2024 US & Canada How did US impeachments go from rare to routine? 28 Sep 2023 US & Canada More 2 days ago Trump's former VP Mike Pence receives JFK Courage Award Pence defied calls by Donald Trump to overturn the result of the 2020 election, and was shunned by Republicans as a result. 2 days ago US & Canada 25 Apr 2025 What would it mean for Ukraine to temporarily give up land? As Ukraine reckons with the terms of a possible peace deal, BBC Verify asks what it could mean in practice. 25 Apr 2025 BBC Verify 16 Apr 2025 Watch: Biden attacks Trump in first speech since leaving White House The former US president says his successor has "done so much damage and so much destruction" in his first days in office. 16 Apr 2025 US & Canada 16 Apr 2025 Biden attacks Trump in first speech since leaving White House The ex-president uses the speech to criticise the Trump administration's cuts to the welfare agency. 16 Apr 2025 US & Canada 15 Apr 2025 Trump blames Zelensky for starting war after massive Russian attack The US president apportioned blame to Ukraine's leader hours after the deadliest strike on civilians this year. 15 Apr 2025 World British Broadcasting Corporation Home News Sport Business Innovation Culture Arts Travel Earth Audio Video Live Weather BBC Shop BritBox BBC in other languages Follow BBC on: Terms of Use About the BBC Privacy Policy Cookies Accessibility Help Contact the BBC Advertise with us Do not share or sell my info Contact technical support Copyright 2025 BBC. All rights reserved. The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites. Read about our approach to external linking.Hunter Biden: What was he doing in China and Ukraine? Skip to content British Broadcasting Corporation Home News Sport Business Innovation Culture Arts Travel Earth Audio Video Live Home News Israel-Gaza War War in Ukraine US & Canada UK UK Politics England N. Ireland N. Ireland Politics Scotland Scotland Politics Wales Wales Politics Africa Asia China India Australia Europe Latin America Middle East In Pictures BBC InDepth BBC Verify Sport Business Executive Lounge Technology of Business Future of Business Innovation Technology Science & Health Artificial Intelligence AI v the Mind Culture Film & TV Music Art & Design Style Books Entertainment News Arts Arts in Motion Travel Destinations Africa Antarctica Asia Australia and Pacific Caribbean & Bermuda Central America Europe Middle East North America South America World’s Table Culture & Experiences Adventures The SpeciaList Earth Natural Wonders Weather & Science Climate Solutions Sustainable Business Green Living Audio Podcasts Radio Audio FAQs Video Live Live News Live Sport Home News Sport Business Innovation Culture Arts Travel Earth Audio Video Live Weather Newsletters Hunter Biden: What was he doing in China and Ukraine? 6 April 2021 Share Save Share Save Getty Images Vice-President Biden in 2016 with his son Hunter looking on Hunter Biden, second son of US President Joe Biden, is being investigated by the Justice Department over his finances including, according to US media reports, some of his business dealings in China. During the 2020 election campaign, he and his father were frequently accused by Donald Trump and his associates of wrongdoing in regards to China and Ukraine, allegations which they both denied. The New York Post reported on an alleged email in which an adviser from a Ukrainian energy company, Burisma, apparently thanked Hunter for inviting him to meet his father, Joe Biden. Asked about the allegations, Joe Biden told a reporter it was a "smear campaign". No criminal activity has been proven, and no evidence has emerged that Mr Biden did anything to intentionally benefit his son. In an interview with the BBC months after his father was sworn in as president, Hunter Biden defended his qualifications for the position at Burisma but added that, in retrospect, he had "missed... the perception that I would create". Claims of influence-peddling are common in Washington DC and Mr Trump's children have also been accused of conflicts of interest in lucrative business deals overseas. They, too, deny wrongdoing. What do we know about the federal investigation? The Justice Department is investigating Hunter Biden's finances including scrutinising some of his past Chinese business dealings and other transactions, a "person familiar with the matter" told The Associated Press in December . The tax investigation was launched in 2018 but Hunter Biden said he had learned about it for the first time in December 2020. Asked about the investigation by US broadcaster CBS this April, the president's son said: "I'm co-operating, completely. And I'm absolutely certain, 100% certain, that at the end of the investigation, that I will be cleared of any wrongdoing." What have the Bidens been accused of in China? The New York Post cited a purported email from Hunter Biden in August 2017 indicating he was receiving a $10m annual fee from a Chinese billionaire for "introductions alone", though it is unclear who was involved in the alleged introductions. Another purported email, which Fox News said it had confirmed, reportedly refers to a deal pursued by Hunter involving China's largest private energy firm. It is said to include a cryptic mention of "10 held by H for the big guy". Fox News cited unnamed sources as saying "the big guy" in the purported email was a reference to Joe Biden. This message is said to be from May 2017. Both emails would date from when the former US vice-president was a private citizen. A former business associate of Hunter Biden has come forward to say he can confirm the allegations. Tony Bobulinski told Fox News that, contrary to Joe Biden's statements that he had nothing to do with his son's business affairs, Hunter had "frequently referenced asking him for his sign-off or advice on various potential deals" in China. Mr Bobulinski, who is reportedly a US Navy veteran, separately told Fox News' Tucker Carlson that he had met on two occasions with Joe Biden to discuss business deals with China, the first time in May 2017 when Barack Obama's former vice-president was a private citizen. He says he asked Joe Biden's brother, James, whether the family was concerned about possible scrutiny of the former vice-president's involvement in a potential business deal with a Chinese entity. Mr Bobulinski told Fox News that James Biden had replied: "Plausible deniability." Mr Bobulinski was invited by Mr Trump to be his guest at the final presidential debate in Nashville, Tennessee on 22 October. What is known about Hunter's dealings in China? In 2013, Hunter flew aboard Air Force Two with his father, who was then vice-president, on an official visit to Beijing, where the younger Biden met investment banker Jonathan Li. Hunter told the New Yorker he had just met Mr Li for "a cup of coffee", but 12 days after the trip a private equity fund, BHR Partners, was approved by the Chinese authorities. Mr Li was chief executive and Hunter was a board member. He would hold a 10% stake. Getty Images Joe Biden walks out of Air Force Two with his granddaughter and son, Hunter Biden BHR is backed by some of China's largest state banks and by local governments, according to US media. Hunter Biden's lawyer said he had joined the board in an unpaid position "based on his interest in seeking ways to bring Chinese capital to international markets". His lawyer also said his client did not acquire his financial stake in BHR until 2017, after his father had left office in the US. Hunter resigned from the board of BHR in April 2020, but still held his 10% stake in BHR as of July this year, according to the company report. What did the New York Post say about Hunter Biden and Ukraine? The New York Post reported an email from April 2015, in which an adviser to Burisma, Vadym Pozharskyi, apparently thanked Hunter Biden for inviting him to meet his father in Washington. Hunter was a director on the board of Burisma - a Ukrainian-owned private energy company while his father was the Obama administration's pointman on US-Ukrainian relations. Hunter was one of several foreigners on its board. The New York Post article did not provide evidence that the meeting had ever taken place. The Biden election campaign said there was no record of any such meeting on the former vice-president's "official schedule" from the time. But in a statement to Politico , the campaign also acknowledged that Mr Biden could have had an "informal interaction" with the Burisma adviser that did not appear on his official schedule, though it said any such encounter would have been "cursory". "Investigations by the press, during impeachment, and even by two Republican-led Senate committees whose work was decried as 'not legitimate' and political by a GOP colleague, have all reached the same conclusion: that Joe Biden carried out official US policy toward Ukraine and engaged in no wrongdoing," said Andrew Bates, a spokesman for Mr Biden. What we know about Biden-Ukraine corruption claims Mr Biden's team has also decried the New York Post story as "Russian disinformation", though it did not say the emails were bogus. The New York Post article was shared by President Trump and his allies. Two of his former advisers, Steve Bannon and Rudy Giuliani, were involved in providing the story and the hard drive containing the alleged emails, to the newspaper. Mr Giuliani says the messages were found on a laptop that Hunter dropped off at a Delaware repair shop in April 2019. Sceptics have noted that Mr Giuliani travelled in December 2019 to Kyiv where he met Ukrainian lawmaker Andriy Derkach, whom the US Treasury has designated as a longtime Kremlin agent. Mr Giuliani has acknowledged trying dig up dirt on the Bidens in Ukraine. But the US Director of National Intelligence, John Ratcliffe, told Fox Business that the purported emails were not connected to a Russian disinformation effort. Other US media say they have been unable to verify the authenticity of the emails. Hunter has neither confirmed nor denied that he dropped off a laptop at the location. Hunter joined Burisma in 2014, and remained on the board until April 2019, when he decided to leave. Speaking to the BBC, he said Burisma had seen his name "as gold" and that it had played a large part in his appointment to the board. Twitter and Facebook's action over Joe Biden article reignites bias claims What are the Bidens accused of in Ukraine? Donald Trump and his allies accused Joe Biden of wrongdoing because he had pushed, while vice-president, for the Ukrainian government to fire its top prosecutor, who was investigating the company for which Hunter worked. In 2016, Joe Biden called for the dismissal of Ukrainian prosecutor Viktor Shokin, whose office had Burisma and other companies under investigation. However, other Western leaders and major bodies that give financial support to Ukraine also wanted the prosecutor dismissed because they believed he was not active enough in tackling corruption. What else has the Biden campaign said? Shortly before the final presidential debate last year, the Democrat's camp released a statement denying wrongdoing. "Joe Biden has never even considered being involved in business with his family, nor in any overseas business whatsoever," said the statement. "He has never held stock in any such business arrangements nor has any family member or any other person ever held stock for him. "What is true is that Tony Bobulinski admitted on the record to Breitbart that he is angry that he was *not* able to go into business with Hunter and James Biden [Joe Biden's brother]." What did this have to do with impeachment? In 2019, details emerged of a phone call Mr Trump, the then president, had made to the president of Ukraine, in which he had urged the Ukrainian leader to investigate the Bidens. President Trump's impeachment explained This led to charges by the Democrats that Mr Trump was trying to illegally pressure Ukraine to help damage his election rival, resulting in impeachment by the House of Representatives. Mr Trump denied he had done anything wrong, and he was later acquitted by the Republican-controlled US Senate. Getty Images President Trump holds a copy of The Washington Post the day after the US Senate acquitted him on two articles of impeachment Has anything been proven against the Bidens? While no criminal activity has been proven, it has raised questions about potential conflicts of interest. A senior State Department official raised such concerns as far back as 2015. Joe Biden's son defends foreign dealings US Republican lawmakers launched an investigation and found last year that Hunter's work for the Ukrainian firm had been "problematic" - but there wasn't evidence that US foreign policy was influenced by it. No criminal charges were proven against Burisma either. The company issued a statement in 2017 saying "all legal proceedings and pending criminal allegations" against it were closed. Last year, Yuriy Lutsenko, the prosecutor in Ukraine who succeeded Viktor Shokin, told the BBC that there was no reason to investigate the Bidens under Ukrainian law. There is nothing illegal about sitting on a board of a company whilst family members serve in government. Hunter Biden's lawyers said in statement in October 2019 that he had undertaken "these business activities independently. He did not believe it appropriate to discuss them with his father, nor did he." Hunter told the New Yorker magazine that on the only occasion he had mentioned Burisma: "Dad said, 'I hope you know what you are doing.'" Amid all the scrutiny, Joe Biden promised last year that if he was elected president, no-one in his family would hold a job or have a business relationship with a foreign corporation or foreign government. Impeachment of Donald Trump US election 2020 BBC Verify Hunter Biden Joe Biden Related Jeremy Bowen: Trump-Zelensky row signals looming crisis between Europe and US 1 Mar 2025 World 'The boss' featured at Trump hush-money trial 25 Apr 2024 US & Canada How did US impeachments go from rare to routine? 28 Sep 2023 US & Canada More 59 mins ago Joe Biden on Trump: 'What president ever talks like that? That's not who we are' Exclusive: The former president tells Nick Robinson his verdict on his successor's first 100 days and his "grave concern" for the future of the Atlantic Alliance 59 mins ago BBC InDepth 1 hr ago Trump appeasing Putin with pressure on Ukraine, Biden tells BBC In his first interview since leaving office, the 82-year-old criticises his successor's handling of the war and is challenged on his own record. 1 hr ago World 1 hr ago Watch: Biden's first interview since leaving the White House Former US President Joe Biden talks Trump, Russia and US-Europe relations with the BBC's Today programme. 1 hr ago US & Canada 2 days ago Trump's former VP Mike Pence receives JFK Courage Award Pence defied calls by Donald Trump to overturn the result of the 2020 election, and was shunned by Republicans as a result. 2 days ago US & Canada 25 Apr 2025 What would it mean for Ukraine to temporarily give up land? As Ukraine reckons with the terms of a possible peace deal, BBC Verify asks what it could mean in practice. 25 Apr 2025 BBC Verify British Broadcasting Corporation Home News Sport Business Innovation Culture Arts Travel Earth Audio Video Live Weather BBC Shop BritBox BBC in other languages Follow BBC on: Terms of Use About the BBC Privacy Policy Cookies Accessibility Help Contact the BBC Advertise with us Do not share or sell my info Contact technical support Copyright 2025 BBC. All rights reserved. The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites. Read about our approach to external linking.The Bidens’ Influence Peddling Timeline - United States House Committee on Oversight and Accountability Skip to main content Toggle navigation Search About Chairman James Comer Full Committee Rules Committee Activity Calendar Hearings Letters Markups Reports Forums Subcommittees Cybersecurity, Information Technology, and Government Innovation Economic Growth, Energy Policy, and Regulatory Affairs Government Operations Health Care and Financial Services Military and Foreign Affairs Federal Law Enforcement Delivering on Government Efficiency Task Force on the Declassification of Federal Secrets Media Center Press Releases The Overview Biden Family Investigation The Bidens’ Influence Peddling Timeline Biden's Border Crisis COVID Origins Blow the Whistle The Bidens’ Influence Peddling Timeline Since taking the gavel in January, the Committee on Oversight and Accountability has accelerated its investigation of the Biden family’s domestic and international business practices to determine whether the Biden family has been targeted by foreign actors, President Biden is compromised, and our national security is threatened. Records obtained through the Committee’s subpoenas to date reveal that the Bidens and their associates have received over $20 million in payments from foreign entities. Below is a timeline that details key dates in our investigation. The main points of interest are: 1) Romania: On September 28, 2015, Vice President Biden welcomed Romanian President Klaus Iohannis to the White House. Within five weeks of this meeting, a Romanian businessman involved with a high-profile corruption prosecution in Romania, Gabriel Popoviciu, began depositing a Biden associate’s bank account, which ultimately made their way into Biden family accounts. Popoviciu made sixteen of the seventeen payments, totaling over $3 million, to the Biden associate account while Joe Biden was Vice President. Biden family accounts ultimately received approximately $1.038 million. The total amount from Romania to the Biden family and their associates is over $3 million. 2) China- CEFC: On March 1, 2017—less than two months after Vice President Joe Biden left public office—State Energy HK Limited, a Chinese company, wired $3 million to a Biden associate’s account. This is the same bank account used in the above “Romania” section. After the Chinese company wired the Biden associate account the $3 million, the Biden family received approximately $1,065,692 over a three-month period in different bank accounts. Additionally, the CEFC Chairman gives Hunter Biden a diamond worth $80,000. Lastly, CEFC creates a joint venture with the Bidens in the summer of 2017. The timeline lays out the “WhatsApp” messages and subsequent wires from the Chinese to the Bidens of $100,000 and $5 million. The total amount from China, specifically with CEFC and their related entities, to the Biden family and their associates is over $8 million. 3) Kazakhstan: On April 22, 2014, Kenes Rakishev, a Kazakhstani oligarch used his Singaporean entity, Novatus Holdings, to wire one of Hunter Biden’s Rosemont Seneca entities $142,300. The very next day—April 23, 2014—the Rosemont Seneca entity transferred the exact same amount of money to a car dealership for a car for Hunter Biden. Hunter Biden and Devon Archer would represent Burisma in Kazakhstan in May/June of 2014 as the company attempted to broker a three-way deal among Burisma, the Kazakhstan government, and a Chinese state-owned energy company. 4) Ukraine: Devon Archer joined the Burisma board of directors in spring of 2014 and was joined by Hunter Biden shortly thereafter. Hunter Biden joined the company as counsel, but after a meeting with Burisma owner Mykola Zlochevsky in Lake Como, Italy, was elevated to the board of directors in the spring of 2014. Both Biden and Archer were each paid $1 million per year for their positions on the board of directors. In December 2015, after a Burisma board of directors meeting, Zlochevsky and Hunter Biden “called D.C.” in the wake of mounting pressures the company was facing. Zlochevsky was later charged with bribing Ukrainian officials with $6 million in an attempt to delay or drop the investigation into his company. The total amount from Ukraine to the Biden family and their associates is $6.5 million. 5) Russia: On February 14, 2014, a Russian oligarch and Russia’s richest woman, Yelena Baturina, wired a Rosemont Seneca entity $3.5 million. On March 11, 2014, the wire was split up: $750,000 was transferred to Devon Archer, and the remainder was sent to Rosemont Seneca Bohai, a company Devon Archer and Hunter Biden split equally. In spring of 2014, Yelena Baturina joined Hunter Biden and Devon Archer to share a meal with then-Vice President Biden at a restaurant in Washington, D.C. The total amount from Russia to the Biden family and their associates is $3.5 million. Beyond this timeline, here are links to our First , Second , Third , and Fourth Bank Memorandums that provide detailed descriptions and show actual bank records and wires. Biden Family Timeline China – BHR China- CEFC Hunter Biden Criminal Investigation Kazakhstan Romania Russia Ukraine 2009 January 20, 2009 Important Date Obama-Biden Administration begins. 2013 November 1, 2013 China – BHR Hunter Biden, business associate, and Chinese investors agree to create Bohai Harvest RST Equity Investment Fund Management Co., Ltd. (BHR), an investment fund controlled by the Bank of China, to focus on mergers and acquisitions, and investment in and reforms of state-owned enterprise. December 4, 2013 China – BHR Vice President Biden travels with Hunter Biden on Air Force 2 to China and meets CEO of BHR, Jonathan Li. Shortly thereafter, BHR’s business license was approved and Hunter Biden was a board member. 2014 February 5, 2014 Kazakhstan Hunter Biden met Kazakhstani oligarch Kenes Rakishev at the Hay Adams Hotel in Washington, D.C. In email correspondences with Devon Archer surrounding the meeting, Rakishev requested Secretary of State John Kerry visit Kazakhstan. Archer replied, “if we have some business started as planned I will ensure its planned soonest.” Rakishev is a Kazakhstani oligarch and millionaire and was a director at Kazakhstan’s state-owned oil company KazMunayGas. Rakishev maintained close ties to Karim Massimov, who became prime minister on April 2, 2014. February 14, 2014 Russia Russian oligarch Yelena Baturina – the wealthiest woman in Russia and then married to the former mayor of Moscow—wired the Rosemont Seneca Thornton bank account $3.5 million. Rosemont Seneca Thornton’s beneficiary was Rosemont Seneca Partners, of which Hunter Biden was the chairman. March 11, 2014 Russia Rosemont Seneca Thornton transferred $2,752,711 to a Rosemont Seneca Bohai bank account. Also on March 11, 2014, $750,000 of the original wire from Baturina was sent to Devon Archer from Rosemont Seneca Thornton. Rosemont Seneca Bohai was an entity used by both Hunter Biden and Devon Archer. In his testimony to the Committee, Archer confirmed that he and Hunter Biden were 50-50 owners in Rosemont Seneca Bohai. Rosemont Seneca Bohai was opened in Delaware on February 13, 2014—the day before the $3.5 million wire from Yelena Baturina. The bank records can be found in the third bank records memo. April 1, 2014 Russia and Kazakhstan In the spring of 2014, after Yelena Baturina sent the $3.5 million wire to Rosemont Seneca Thornton and around the same time that Kenes Rakishev wired money to Rosemont Seneca Bohai for Hunter Biden’s sportscar, Vice President Biden attended dinner with Yelena Baturina, Kenes Rakishev, Karim Massimov, Hunter Biden, Devon Archer, and others at Café Milano in Washington, D.C. Joe Biden stayed for dinner. Devon Archer provided this information during his transcribed interview . April 15, 2014 Ukraine Burisma, a Ukrainian energy company, appoints Biden business associate to their board of directors. April 22, 2014 Kazakhstan Kenes Rakishev’s Singaporean company wires $142,300 through his Latvian company to a Rosemont entity. The details can be found in the third bank records memorandum . April 22, 2014 Ukraine Vice President Biden travels to Ukraine and gives an anti-corruption speech. April 23, 2014 Kazakhstan The Rosemont entity wires $142,300 to a car dealership in New Jersey for a new sports car for Hunter Biden. The details can be found in the third bank records memorandum . May 12, 2014 Ukraine Burisma announces Hunter Biden joined its board of directors. May 21, 2014 Romania Vice President Biden visits Romania and delivers a speech to the Romanian Prime Minister, judges, prosecutors, and leaders of the Romanian Parliament. September 12, 2014 China – BHR BHR invests $1.7 billion in CCP-linked petroleum and chemical company. December 9, 2014 China – BHR Hunter Biden and business associate invest $484,920 into BHR. December 22, 2014 Kazakhstan Kenes Rakishev’s Kazakhstani oil company and Burisma join with a CCP-linked company and announce a transnational financial arrangement. 2015 April 16, 2015 Ukraine and Kazakhstan On April 16, 2015, Vice President Joe Biden attended a dinner with Karim Massimov, Vadym Pozharsky, Hunter Biden, Devon Archer, and others at Café Milano in Washington, D.C. Devon Archer provided this information during his transcribed interview . September 15, 2015 China – BHR BHR joins with a CCP-linked entity to acquire US-based Henniges Automotive in a deal reportedly worth $600 million. September 28, 2015 Romania Vice President Biden welcomes Romanian President Klaus Iohannis to the White House. A readout of the meeting states, the “Vice President welcomed President Iohannis’ focus on anti-corruption efforts and rule of law as a means to strengthen national security and promote greater investment and economic growth.” President Iohannis said the Vice President “voiced satisfaction over Romania’s progress with the fight against corruption.” November 2, 2015 Ukraine Vadym Pozharskyi suggests high level U.S. level officials come to Ukraine and talk with Prosecutor General Viktor Shokin and President Petro Poroshenko about Mykola Zlochevsky’s investigations. Prosecutor General Shokin was investigating Burisma and Burisma’s owner, Zlochevsky for fraud. Prosecutor General Shokin is the Ukranian government official Vice President Biden demanded Poroshenko fire. November 5, 2015 Romania Romanian businessman, Gabriel Popoviciu, begins making deposits into Robinson Walker, LLC’s bank account. Robinson Walker, LLC is an entity owned by a Biden associate, Rob Walker. Popoviciu’s company sent Robinson Walker the first wire for $179,836.86. From November 2015 to May 2017, Popoviciu’s company paid Robinson Walker, LLC over $3 million. Biden family accounts received approximately $1.038 million from the Robinson Walker, LLC account after Popoviciu’s deposits. Sixteen of the seventeen payments from Popoviciu’s company to Robinson Walker, LLC were made while Joe Biden was Vice President. Details can be found in the Second Bank Records Memorandum . November 6, 2015 Ukraine Amos Hochstein, a high level U.S. government offical working in the Obama-Biden Administration, meets with Hunter Biden and discusses Burisma. November 9, 2015 Romania Rob Walker’s account wires Hunter Biden $59,900. Details can be found in the Second Bank Records Memorandum. November 11, 2015 Ukraine Amos Hochstein meets with Vice President Biden in the West Wing. November 12, 2015 Ukraine Amos Hochstein calls Hunter Biden. November 13, 2015 Romania Hunter Biden meets with the U.S. Ambassador to Romania. November 13, 2015 Ukraine VP Biden touched down in Ukraine last night. Read his initial notes from the road: https://t.co/FdPysDjiqT pic.twitter.com/ybZFp7frYe — VP Biden (Archived) (@VP44) December 7, 2015 Vice President Biden announces trip to Ukraine to take place the first week of December 2015. November 14, 2015 Ukraine Vadym Pozharskyi emails Hunter Biden confirmation that the Vice President will be traveling to Ukraine. November 14, 2015 Romania Hunter Biden meets with the Ambassador of Romania to the United States. November 15, 2015 Romania Hunter Biden travels to Romania. December 4, 2015 Ukraine Mykola Zlochevsky and Vadym Pozharsky complain about constant “government pressures” and urge Hunter Biden to call the Vice President of the United States, Joe Biden. Devon Archer testified that Hunter Biden, Zlochevsky, and Pozharsky “called D.C.” Devon Archer provided this information during his transcribed interview . December 7, 2015 China – CEFC Hunter Biden and CEFC Chairman Ye Jianming begin communicating regarding a possible U.S. partnership. December 7, 2015 Romania Robinson Walker, LLC wires Hunter Biden $59,725. Details can be found in the Second Bank Records Memorandum. December 7, 2015 Ukraine https://oversight.house.gov/wp-content/uploads/2023/07/Biden-Firing-Ukraine-Prosecutor-Clip.mp4 Vice President Biden arrives in Ukraine, where he demands Prosecutor General Shokin be fired if Ukraine wants $1 billion in International Monetary Fund (IMF) loans. December 9, 2015 Ukraine Vice President Biden departs Ukraine and gets a commitment from President Poroshenko that Prosecutor General Shokin will be fired. December 17, 2015 Ukraine Vice President Biden hosts a holiday party at the Vice Presidential residence, which Amos Hochstein and Hunter Biden both attend. December 23, 2015 Romania Robinson Walker, LLC wires Hunter Biden $60,091.24. Details can be found in the Second Bank Records Memorandum . 2016 January 20, 2016 Ukraine Vice President Biden meets with President Poroshenko in Switzerland at the World Economic Forum where Biden reinforced the linkage between the loan guarantee and the necessary reforms. February 4, 2016 Ukraine Mykola Zlochevsky gives Hunter Biden unspecified, extravagant birthday gifts. February 11, 2016 Ukraine Vice President Biden and President Poroshenko conduct a call. February 12, 2016 Romania Robinson Walker, LLC wires Hunter Biden’s Owasco P.C. $61,126.24. Details can be found in the Second Bank Records Memorandum. February 16, 2016 Ukraine President Poroshenko asks Prosecutor General Shokin to resign. February 18, 2016 Ukraine Vice President Biden calls President Poroshenko to thank him for calling on Prosecutor General Shokin to resign. February 19, 2016 Ukraine President Poroshenko says he recieved Prosecutor General Shokin’s letter of resignation. March 24, 2016 Romania Robinson Walker, LLC wires Owasco P.C. $61,816.05. Details can be found in the Second Bank Records Memorandum. March 29, 2016 Romania Hunter Biden meets again with U.S. Ambassador to Romania. March 29, 2016 Ukraine Ukranian Parliament approves President Poroshenko’s firing of Prosecutor General Shokin. May 23, 2016 Romania Robinson Walker, LLC wires Owasco P.C. $123,830.80. Details can be found in the Second Bank Records Memorandum. May 23, 2016 Romania Robinson Walker, LLC wires Owasco P.C. $53,419.74. Details can be found in the Second Bank Records Memorandum. July 11, 2016 Romania Robinson Walker, LLC wires Owasco P.C. $116,860.93. Details can be found in the Second Bank Records Memorandum. Load More Share via Email About Chairman James Comer Full Committee Rules Committee Activity Calendar Hearings Letters Markups Reports Forums Subcommittees Cybersecurity, Information Technology, and Government Innovation Economic Growth, Energy Policy, and Regulatory Affairs Government Operations Health Care and Financial Services Military and Foreign Affairs Federal Law Enforcement Delivering on Government Efficiency Task Force on the Declassification of Federal Secrets Media Center Press Releases The Overview Biden Family Investigation The Bidens’ Influence Peddling Timeline Biden's Border Crisis COVID Origins Blow the Whistle Minority © 2025 Committee on Oversight and Government Reform Privacy Policy 2157 Rayburn House Office Building Washington, DC 20515 Phone: (202) 225-5074 Fax: (202) 225-3974 Search About Chairman James Comer Full Committee Rules Committee Activity Calendar Hearings Letters Markups Reports Forums Subcommittees Cybersecurity, Information Technology, and Government Innovation Economic Growth, Energy Policy, and Regulatory Affairs Government Operations Health Care and Financial Services Military and Foreign Affairs Federal Law Enforcement Delivering on Government Efficiency Task Force on the Declassification of Federal Secrets Media Center Press Releases The Overview Biden Family Investigation The Bidens’ Influence Peddling Timeline Biden's Border Crisis COVID Origins Blow the WhistlePresident Donald J. Trump Achieved the Biggest Tax Cuts and Reforms in American History – The White House Skip to content This is historical material “frozen in time”. The website is no longer updated and links to external websites and some internal pages may not work. Open Menu WhiteHouse.gov WhiteHouse.gov Copy URL to your clipboard Share Economy National Security Budget Immigration Energy Search WhiteHouse.gov Open Search Fact Sheets President Donald J. Trump Achieved the Biggest Tax Cuts and Reforms in American History Budget & Spending Issued on: February 5, 2018 Share: Share on Facebook Share on Twitter Copy URL to your clipboard All News Quote And just as I promised the American people from this podium 11 months ago, we enacted the biggest tax cuts and reforms in American history. Our massive tax cuts provide tremendous relief for the middle class and small business. President Donald J. Trump BIGGEST TAX CUTS AND REFORMS: Because of President Donald J. Trump, Americans will benefit from the biggest tax cuts and reforms in American history. President Trump’s tax cuts are the biggest gross tax cuts in American history, cutting over $5.5 trillion in taxes over ten years. The President’s tax law included substantial reforms to make taxes simpler and fairer, which helped offset the cost of the tax cuts and thereby limit the net tax cut to $1.5 trillion. President Trump cut the corporate tax rate from 35 percent to 21 percent, the largest percentage point reduction of the top marginal rate in history. President Trump’s tax cuts include the biggest increase in the child tax credit in history. The Child Tax Credit was increased by $573.4 billion over ten years, larger than any previous change to credits specifically targeting families. President Trump’s tax cuts included some of the most substantial reforms to the tax code in American history. The Tax Cuts and Jobs Act will help end the offshoring of corporate money by transitioning the country to a territorial system of corporate taxation and creating anti-abuse rules for multinationals that artificially shift profits offshore. The Tax Cuts and Jobs Act nearly doubles the standard deduction, to simplify tax filing. The Tax Cuts and Jobs Act limits itemized deductions, while maintaining the most popular deductions, such as the mortgage interest deduction and charitable giving deduction. The Tax Cuts and Jobs Act facilitates school choice by allowing families to use 529 college savings plans for elementary and secondary education expense and spend up to $10,000 annually on private school tuition and related expenses, in addition to the uses previously allowed. The first new community development tax incentive program enacted since the Clinton administration, providing an opportunity for mainstream private investors to support businesses and distressed communities with the creation of Opportunity Zones. The Tax Cuts and Jobs Act repeals the individual mandate, marking the single largest legislative blow to Obamacare since the law was passed. This individual mandate is particularly painful for low and middle-income Americans: 79 percent of people who paid the penalty in 2016 had household income below $50,000. The tax law’s repeal of the individual mandate relieves Americans from the unprecedented assault on liberty, where the Federal Government fined Americans for not purchasing something. As a combination of tax cuts and tax reform, the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act was therefore the biggest legislative action reforming our tax code in history. AMERICAN COMPANIES ARE DELIVERING: Businesses throughout the country are responding to President Trump’s tax cuts by rewarding American workers. Since President Trump provided his historic tax cuts and reforms, more than 3.5 million American workers across more than 300 companies have received bonuses, raises, and increased. Many companies have also announced new investments and new hiring. Best Buy has announced it is giving a $1,000 bonus to full-time employees and a $500 bonus to part-time employees, in addition to investing $20 million to expand technology development centers across the United States. Quest Diagnostics is giving a bonus of up to $500 to nearly 40,000 employees and investing $75 million of its tax savings back into the company and employees. Discover announced it would raise its minimum wage to $15.25 an hour and had paid a $1,000 bonus to more than 15,000 non-executive employees. Hostess Brands is providing employees with a $750 cash bonus and $500 contribution to their 401(k) accounts, in addition to providing a year’s worth of free Hostess products. Cigna announced that it was increasing its minimum wage in the United States to $16 an hour and adding $30 million to its 401(k) program to match additional contributions, benefitting more than 30,000 employees. Lowe’s announced it was giving a bonus of up to $1,000 to employees and expanding its benefits package for full-time workers to include 10 weeks of maternity leave, two weeks of parental leave, and adoption assistance. BUILDING ON OUR ECONOMIC MOMENTUM: President Trump’s tax cuts are expanding on a strong economy that continues to benefit American workers. Average hourly wages increased by 2.9 percent last year, the largest increase in 8 years. 200,000 jobs were added in January, while the unemployment rate remained at its lowest level in 17 years, 4.1 percent. Manufacturing expanded in January at near the fastest pace since 2004, according to the Institute for Supply Management data. Recent polling shows Americans are satisfied with the state of the U.S. economy, with the percentage of those polled with positive views of the economy at a 17-year high. Consumer optimism increased in January according to The Conference Board’s Consumer Confidence Survey. Consumers are confident that the strong pace of growth seen in late 2017 will continue in 2018. According to the UBS Investor Watch Quarterly, which surveys business owner sentiment, optimism has soared since the passage of tax reform. UBS found that positive economic outlook among business owners has grown by 18 percentage points between quarter four of 2017 and quarter one of 2018. UBS found that 79 percent of the businesses owners surveyed were satisfied with the tax bill and 72 percent believed it would boost the economy. WhiteHouse.gov The White House Twitter Facebook Instagram YouTube President Donald J. Trump Vice President Mike Pence First Lady Melania Trump Mrs. Karen Pence The Cabinet Administration Accomplishments News Remarks Articles Presidential Actions Briefings & Statements About The White House Economy & Jobs Budget & Spending Education Immigration National Security & Defense Healthcare Council of Economic Advisers Council of Environmental Quality National Security Council Office of Management and Budget Office of National Drug Control Policy Office of Science and Technology Policy Copyright Privacy Policy Menu News Remarks Briefings & Statements Presidential Actions Articles All News Issues Education National Security & Defense Budget & Spending Immigration Healthcare All Issues The Administration President Donald J. Trump Vice President Michael R. Pence First Lady Melania Trump Second Lady Karen Pence The Cabinet Disclosures Executive Offices Council of Economic Advisers Council on Environmental Quality National Security Council Office of Management and Budget Office of National Drug Control Policy Office of Science and Technology Policy About The White House White House Tours Past Presidents Past First Ladies The Grounds Our Government Get Involved Write or Call the White House White House Internship Program White House Fellows Contact Live Search Type Your Search Press enter to searchPresident Donald J. Trump Achieved the Biggest Tax Cuts and Reforms in American History – The White House Skip to content This is historical material “frozen in time”. The website is no longer updated and links to external websites and some internal pages may not work. Open Menu WhiteHouse.gov WhiteHouse.gov Copy URL to your clipboard Share Economy National Security Budget Immigration Energy Search WhiteHouse.gov Open Search Fact Sheets President Donald J. Trump Achieved the Biggest Tax Cuts and Reforms in American History Budget & Spending Issued on: February 5, 2018 Share: Share on Facebook Share on Twitter Copy URL to your clipboard All News Quote And just as I promised the American people from this podium 11 months ago, we enacted the biggest tax cuts and reforms in American history. Our massive tax cuts provide tremendous relief for the middle class and small business. President Donald J. Trump BIGGEST TAX CUTS AND REFORMS: Because of President Donald J. Trump, Americans will benefit from the biggest tax cuts and reforms in American history. President Trump’s tax cuts are the biggest gross tax cuts in American history, cutting over $5.5 trillion in taxes over ten years. The President’s tax law included substantial reforms to make taxes simpler and fairer, which helped offset the cost of the tax cuts and thereby limit the net tax cut to $1.5 trillion. President Trump cut the corporate tax rate from 35 percent to 21 percent, the largest percentage point reduction of the top marginal rate in history. President Trump’s tax cuts include the biggest increase in the child tax credit in history. The Child Tax Credit was increased by $573.4 billion over ten years, larger than any previous change to credits specifically targeting families. President Trump’s tax cuts included some of the most substantial reforms to the tax code in American history. The Tax Cuts and Jobs Act will help end the offshoring of corporate money by transitioning the country to a territorial system of corporate taxation and creating anti-abuse rules for multinationals that artificially shift profits offshore. The Tax Cuts and Jobs Act nearly doubles the standard deduction, to simplify tax filing. The Tax Cuts and Jobs Act limits itemized deductions, while maintaining the most popular deductions, such as the mortgage interest deduction and charitable giving deduction. The Tax Cuts and Jobs Act facilitates school choice by allowing families to use 529 college savings plans for elementary and secondary education expense and spend up to $10,000 annually on private school tuition and related expenses, in addition to the uses previously allowed. The first new community development tax incentive program enacted since the Clinton administration, providing an opportunity for mainstream private investors to support businesses and distressed communities with the creation of Opportunity Zones. The Tax Cuts and Jobs Act repeals the individual mandate, marking the single largest legislative blow to Obamacare since the law was passed. This individual mandate is particularly painful for low and middle-income Americans: 79 percent of people who paid the penalty in 2016 had household income below $50,000. The tax law’s repeal of the individual mandate relieves Americans from the unprecedented assault on liberty, where the Federal Government fined Americans for not purchasing something. As a combination of tax cuts and tax reform, the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act was therefore the biggest legislative action reforming our tax code in history. AMERICAN COMPANIES ARE DELIVERING: Businesses throughout the country are responding to President Trump’s tax cuts by rewarding American workers. Since President Trump provided his historic tax cuts and reforms, more than 3.5 million American workers across more than 300 companies have received bonuses, raises, and increased. Many companies have also announced new investments and new hiring. Best Buy has announced it is giving a $1,000 bonus to full-time employees and a $500 bonus to part-time employees, in addition to investing $20 million to expand technology development centers across the United States. Quest Diagnostics is giving a bonus of up to $500 to nearly 40,000 employees and investing $75 million of its tax savings back into the company and employees. Discover announced it would raise its minimum wage to $15.25 an hour and had paid a $1,000 bonus to more than 15,000 non-executive employees. Hostess Brands is providing employees with a $750 cash bonus and $500 contribution to their 401(k) accounts, in addition to providing a year’s worth of free Hostess products. Cigna announced that it was increasing its minimum wage in the United States to $16 an hour and adding $30 million to its 401(k) program to match additional contributions, benefitting more than 30,000 employees. Lowe’s announced it was giving a bonus of up to $1,000 to employees and expanding its benefits package for full-time workers to include 10 weeks of maternity leave, two weeks of parental leave, and adoption assistance. BUILDING ON OUR ECONOMIC MOMENTUM: President Trump’s tax cuts are expanding on a strong economy that continues to benefit American workers. Average hourly wages increased by 2.9 percent last year, the largest increase in 8 years. 200,000 jobs were added in January, while the unemployment rate remained at its lowest level in 17 years, 4.1 percent. Manufacturing expanded in January at near the fastest pace since 2004, according to the Institute for Supply Management data. Recent polling shows Americans are satisfied with the state of the U.S. economy, with the percentage of those polled with positive views of the economy at a 17-year high. Consumer optimism increased in January according to The Conference Board’s Consumer Confidence Survey. Consumers are confident that the strong pace of growth seen in late 2017 will continue in 2018. According to the UBS Investor Watch Quarterly, which surveys business owner sentiment, optimism has soared since the passage of tax reform. UBS found that positive economic outlook among business owners has grown by 18 percentage points between quarter four of 2017 and quarter one of 2018. UBS found that 79 percent of the businesses owners surveyed were satisfied with the tax bill and 72 percent believed it would boost the economy. WhiteHouse.gov The White House Twitter Facebook Instagram YouTube President Donald J. Trump Vice President Mike Pence First Lady Melania Trump Mrs. Karen Pence The Cabinet Administration Accomplishments News Remarks Articles Presidential Actions Briefings & Statements About The White House Economy & Jobs Budget & Spending Education Immigration National Security & Defense Healthcare Council of Economic Advisers Council of Environmental Quality National Security Council Office of Management and Budget Office of National Drug Control Policy Office of Science and Technology Policy Copyright Privacy Policy Menu News Remarks Briefings & Statements Presidential Actions Articles All News Issues Education National Security & Defense Budget & Spending Immigration Healthcare All Issues The Administration President Donald J. Trump Vice President Michael R. Pence First Lady Melania Trump Second Lady Karen Pence The Cabinet Disclosures Executive Offices Council of Economic Advisers Council on Environmental Quality National Security Council Office of Management and Budget Office of National Drug Control Policy Office of Science and Technology Policy About The White House White House Tours Past Presidents Past First Ladies The Grounds Our Government Get Involved Write or Call the White House White House Internship Program White House Fellows Contact Live Search Type Your Search Press enter to searchKenya’s ex-prime minister Odinga mangles his numbers on government revenue share in Nigeria - Africa Check Skip to main content English Français Main navigation Fact-checks Reports Factsheets Guides Spot Checks Blog Meta programme fact-checks Republish our work Who we are Our team Our impact How we are funded Partners Get in touch What we do Info Finder African Fact-Checking Awards Corrections Fact-checking research Training Media Literacy Educator knowledge hub How we fact-check Corrections policy Code of principles How we rate claims Get Involved Donate Submit a claim to fact-check Partner with us Join our team Fact-checking tips Quizzes Donate Back to Africa Check Kenya’s ex-prime minister Odinga mangles his numbers on government revenue share in Nigeria Published on 23 September 2020 Claim Three claims about how revenue is shared between Nigeria’s three levels of government. Verdict One correct, two incorrect Source Kenya’s former prime minister Raila Odinga (August 2020) This article is more than 4 years old Since 2004 Nigeria’s revenue sharing formula has given 52.68% to the federal government, 26.72% to states and 20.60% to local governments. Odinga was correct about local governments’ share, but wide of the mark for the other two government levels. And experts question his claim that Nigeria’s system “works perfectly well”. After months of an often fractious stalemate , in September 2020 Kenya’s senate hammered out a deal on how revenue would be shared between the country’s two levels of government. In August, at the height of the deadlock, former prime minister Odinga returned to a familiar talking point to argue for establishing a third tier of government. Building on this in an interview with Citizen TV , Odinga, who is also an African Union envoy , said Kenya could solve the recurring battle over how to share revenue if it looked to Nigeria for lessons. Nigeria, he said, had a local, state and federal system of government. “In terms of revenue share, 20% of the revenue goes to the local, 35% goes to the state and 45% goes to the federal governments ... and it works perfectly well,” Odinga said . We checked if he was on the mark about how revenue is shared in Africa’s largest economy . Claim In Nigeria … in terms of revenue share, 20% goes to the local government. Verdict correct We asked Dennis Onyango, Odinga’s spokesperson, for the source of the former leader’s claims. We will update this report with his response. In line with its constitution , Nigeria has a federal capital authority, 36 states and 768 local government authorities. There are also six area councils. The Revenue Mobilisation, Allocation and Fiscal Commission proposes a formula for how revenue is to be shared between the three levels. This is then approved by the national assembly . The revenue formula was first used in 1982 when the Nigeria Revenue Allocation Act came into effect. The law stipulated that 56% of funds would go to the federal government, 24% to states and 20% to local governments. The current formula can be traced to a March 2004 circular from the finance ministry. It has remained at these levels since. “The revenue allocation formula is still 52.68%, 26.72% and 20.6%,” Prof Sherifdeen Tella, professor of economics at Olabisi Onabanjo University told Africa Check. Before the revenue is split an amount “not less than 13%” is deducted and shared among the oil producing states based on their production levels. According to data from Nigeria's extractive industries transparency initiative , a government agency supervised by the president’s office, local governments get 20.6% of national revenue. We therefore rate Odinga as correct on this claim. Recent local government allocations at 20% The most recent full year data from the budget office shows that in 2019, local governments received N1.04 trillion of the N5.05 trillion available for sharing among the three levels of government. And in the first quarter of 2020, local governments got N441.44 billion of the N2.14 trillion available. Both these amounts work out to about 20% for local governments. (Note: Value-added tax is also shared among the three levels of government, using a different formula. Local governments get 35% of VAT revenue, state governments 50% and the federal government 15%.) Claim 35% of revenue goes to states. Verdict incorrect Data from Nigeria's extractive industries transparency initiative shows that 26.72% is reserved for the state governments, not the 35% Odinga claimed. We therefore rate this claim as incorrect. In 2019, of the N5.05 trillion available for sharing, states got N1.35 trillion. In the first quarter of 2020, states received N572.59 billion of the N2.14 trillion available. Both these allocations work out to 26.72%, in keeping with the formula. Claim 45% of revenue goes to the federal governments. Verdict incorrect Odinga’s claim of 45% is not accurate. Official data shows the federal government gets more than half of the total revenue. In 2019, data from the budget office shows the federal government received N2.66 trillion of the N5.05 trillion available for sharing. In the first quarter of 2020 it got N1.13 trillion out of N2.14 trillion. These amounts tally with the 52.68% set out in the sharing formula. Does Nigeria’s revenue sharing model work ‘perfectly well’? Raila Odinga’s assertion that the Nigerian revenue sharing formula “works perfectly” is contested. Gazie Okpara , a professor of marketing at Abia State University in southeast Nigeria whose interests include social policy, said the formula was imperfect because how the funds were spent was not transparent. “Each level of government should always give an account of how funds were spent,” he said, an audit that should be provided for in the constitution. Prof Sherifdeen Tella, a professor of economics at Olabisi Onabanjo University in southwestern Nigeria, told Africa Check that in his view, allocations to state and local governments, and especially the former, should be increased. “What is allocated to these two tiers of government is not sufficient.” Matthew Akintayo is a professor at the University of Ibadan , also in southwestern Nigeria. One of his focus areas is the economics of education. He told Africa Check that the sharing formula should be restructured. “A bulk or vast fraction of resources should be allocated to the state and local government because both arms of government are closer to the grassroots,” he said. He added that state governors should be given more leeway to manage their resources. John Kinuthia, a senior programme officer at the International Budget Partnership , told Africa Check that Odinga should also have considered the nature of devolved functions when drawing comparisons. It was difficult to compare Kenyan counties with Nigerian states, partly because they had different functions, Kinuthia said. He gave the example of education. “In Nigeria there are functions like education that are devolved, which is why you see a bigger proportion of resources at the subnational level compared to Kenya. In Kenya, education is still at the national level.” Republish our content for free We believe that everyone needs the facts. You can republish the text of this article free of charge, both online and in print. However, we ask that you pay attention to these simple guidelines . In a nutshell: 1. Do not include images, as in most cases we do not own the copyright. 2. Please do not edit the article. 3. Make sure you credit "Africa Check" in the byline and don't forget to mention that the article was originally published on africacheck.org . Name Surname Email Leave this field blank Vincent Ng’ethe in Nairobi and Motunrayo Joel in Lagos Claim Three claims about how revenue is shared between Nigeria’s three levels of government. Verdict One correct, two incorrect Source Kenya’s former prime minister Raila Odinga (August 2020) Join us on WhatsApp Further Reading false Nigeria Biafra Nnamdi Kanu arrest government No evidence Biafran pro-independence leader Nnamdi Kanu's wife and son arrested by Nigerian government scam Kenya government free online courses online scam No, Kenyan government not offering free online courses to all adults Kenya Economy William Ruto diaspora remittance revenue GDP #RutoRecordReport Precision or spin? Evaluating Kenyan president Ruto’s mid-term economic scorecard Add new comment Your name Comment About text formats Restricted HTML Allowed HTML tags: <a href hreflang> <em> <strong> <cite> <blockquote cite> <code> <ul type> <ol start type> <li> <dl> <dt> <dd> <h2 id> <h3 id> <h4 id> <h5 id> <h6 id> Lines and paragraphs break automatically. Web page addresses and email addresses turn into links automatically. limit: 600 characters Leave this field blank Sign up to our newsletter Name Africa Check values your trust and is committed to the responsible management, use and protection of personal information. See our privacy policy. Leave this field blank Spot Checks View All false Nigeria Biafra Nnamdi Kanu arrest government No evidence Biafran pro-independence leader Nnamdi Kanu's wife and son arrested by Nigerian government scam Kenya government free online courses online scam No, Kenyan government not offering free online courses to all adults Kenya Economy William Ruto diaspora remittance revenue GDP #RutoRecordReport Precision or spin? Evaluating Kenyan president Ruto’s mid-term economic scorecard We hold public figures accountable For democracy to function, public figures need to be held to account for what they say. The claims they make need to be checked, openly and impartially. Africa Check is an independent, non-partisan organisation which assesses claims made in the public arena using journalistic skills and evidence drawn from the latest online tools, readers, public sources and experts, sorting fact from fiction and publishing the results. Browse by category Health Covid-19 Education Crime Economy Kenya Nigeria Senegal South Africa Sign up to our newsletter Name Africa Check values your trust and is committed to the responsible management, use and protection of personal information. See our privacy policy. Leave this field blank Follow us Facebook Twitter Instagram TikTok Footer About Partner With Us Terms and Conditions Contact Us Sitemap Want to keep reading our fact-checks? We will never charge you for verified, reliable information. Help us keep it that way by supporting our work. Become a newsletter subscriber Name Africa Check values your trust and is committed to the responsible management, use and protection of personal information. See our privacy policy. Leave this field blank Support independent fact-checking in Africa. See our donation optionsKenya’s ex-prime minister Odinga mangles his numbers on government revenue share in Nigeria - Africa Check Skip to main content English Français Main navigation Fact-checks Reports Factsheets Guides Spot Checks Blog Meta programme fact-checks Republish our work Who we are Our team Our impact How we are funded Partners Get in touch What we do Info Finder African Fact-Checking Awards Corrections Fact-checking research Training Media Literacy Educator knowledge hub How we fact-check Corrections policy Code of principles How we rate claims Get Involved Donate Submit a claim to fact-check Partner with us Join our team Fact-checking tips Quizzes Donate Back to Africa Check Kenya’s ex-prime minister Odinga mangles his numbers on government revenue share in Nigeria Published on 23 September 2020 Claim Three claims about how revenue is shared between Nigeria’s three levels of government. Verdict One correct, two incorrect Source Kenya’s former prime minister Raila Odinga (August 2020) This article is more than 4 years old Since 2004 Nigeria’s revenue sharing formula has given 52.68% to the federal government, 26.72% to states and 20.60% to local governments. Odinga was correct about local governments’ share, but wide of the mark for the other two government levels. And experts question his claim that Nigeria’s system “works perfectly well”. After months of an often fractious stalemate , in September 2020 Kenya’s senate hammered out a deal on how revenue would be shared between the country’s two levels of government. In August, at the height of the deadlock, former prime minister Odinga returned to a familiar talking point to argue for establishing a third tier of government. Building on this in an interview with Citizen TV , Odinga, who is also an African Union envoy , said Kenya could solve the recurring battle over how to share revenue if it looked to Nigeria for lessons. Nigeria, he said, had a local, state and federal system of government. “In terms of revenue share, 20% of the revenue goes to the local, 35% goes to the state and 45% goes to the federal governments ... and it works perfectly well,” Odinga said . We checked if he was on the mark about how revenue is shared in Africa’s largest economy . Claim In Nigeria … in terms of revenue share, 20% goes to the local government. Verdict correct We asked Dennis Onyango, Odinga’s spokesperson, for the source of the former leader’s claims. We will update this report with his response. In line with its constitution , Nigeria has a federal capital authority, 36 states and 768 local government authorities. There are also six area councils. The Revenue Mobilisation, Allocation and Fiscal Commission proposes a formula for how revenue is to be shared between the three levels. This is then approved by the national assembly . The revenue formula was first used in 1982 when the Nigeria Revenue Allocation Act came into effect. The law stipulated that 56% of funds would go to the federal government, 24% to states and 20% to local governments. The current formula can be traced to a March 2004 circular from the finance ministry. It has remained at these levels since. “The revenue allocation formula is still 52.68%, 26.72% and 20.6%,” Prof Sherifdeen Tella, professor of economics at Olabisi Onabanjo University told Africa Check. Before the revenue is split an amount “not less than 13%” is deducted and shared among the oil producing states based on their production levels. According to data from Nigeria's extractive industries transparency initiative , a government agency supervised by the president’s office, local governments get 20.6% of national revenue. We therefore rate Odinga as correct on this claim. Recent local government allocations at 20% The most recent full year data from the budget office shows that in 2019, local governments received N1.04 trillion of the N5.05 trillion available for sharing among the three levels of government. And in the first quarter of 2020, local governments got N441.44 billion of the N2.14 trillion available. Both these amounts work out to about 20% for local governments. (Note: Value-added tax is also shared among the three levels of government, using a different formula. Local governments get 35% of VAT revenue, state governments 50% and the federal government 15%.) Claim 35% of revenue goes to states. Verdict incorrect Data from Nigeria's extractive industries transparency initiative shows that 26.72% is reserved for the state governments, not the 35% Odinga claimed. We therefore rate this claim as incorrect. In 2019, of the N5.05 trillion available for sharing, states got N1.35 trillion. In the first quarter of 2020, states received N572.59 billion of the N2.14 trillion available. Both these allocations work out to 26.72%, in keeping with the formula. Claim 45% of revenue goes to the federal governments. Verdict incorrect Odinga’s claim of 45% is not accurate. Official data shows the federal government gets more than half of the total revenue. In 2019, data from the budget office shows the federal government received N2.66 trillion of the N5.05 trillion available for sharing. In the first quarter of 2020 it got N1.13 trillion out of N2.14 trillion. These amounts tally with the 52.68% set out in the sharing formula. Does Nigeria’s revenue sharing model work ‘perfectly well’? Raila Odinga’s assertion that the Nigerian revenue sharing formula “works perfectly” is contested. Gazie Okpara , a professor of marketing at Abia State University in southeast Nigeria whose interests include social policy, said the formula was imperfect because how the funds were spent was not transparent. “Each level of government should always give an account of how funds were spent,” he said, an audit that should be provided for in the constitution. Prof Sherifdeen Tella, a professor of economics at Olabisi Onabanjo University in southwestern Nigeria, told Africa Check that in his view, allocations to state and local governments, and especially the former, should be increased. “What is allocated to these two tiers of government is not sufficient.” Matthew Akintayo is a professor at the University of Ibadan , also in southwestern Nigeria. One of his focus areas is the economics of education. He told Africa Check that the sharing formula should be restructured. “A bulk or vast fraction of resources should be allocated to the state and local government because both arms of government are closer to the grassroots,” he said. He added that state governors should be given more leeway to manage their resources. John Kinuthia, a senior programme officer at the International Budget Partnership , told Africa Check that Odinga should also have considered the nature of devolved functions when drawing comparisons. It was difficult to compare Kenyan counties with Nigerian states, partly because they had different functions, Kinuthia said. He gave the example of education. “In Nigeria there are functions like education that are devolved, which is why you see a bigger proportion of resources at the subnational level compared to Kenya. In Kenya, education is still at the national level.” Republish our content for free We believe that everyone needs the facts. You can republish the text of this article free of charge, both online and in print. However, we ask that you pay attention to these simple guidelines . In a nutshell: 1. Do not include images, as in most cases we do not own the copyright. 2. Please do not edit the article. 3. Make sure you credit "Africa Check" in the byline and don't forget to mention that the article was originally published on africacheck.org . Name Surname Email Leave this field blank Vincent Ng’ethe in Nairobi and Motunrayo Joel in Lagos Claim Three claims about how revenue is shared between Nigeria’s three levels of government. Verdict One correct, two incorrect Source Kenya’s former prime minister Raila Odinga (August 2020) Join us on WhatsApp Further Reading false Nigeria Biafra Nnamdi Kanu arrest government No evidence Biafran pro-independence leader Nnamdi Kanu's wife and son arrested by Nigerian government scam Kenya government free online courses online scam No, Kenyan government not offering free online courses to all adults Kenya Economy William Ruto diaspora remittance revenue GDP #RutoRecordReport Precision or spin? Evaluating Kenyan president Ruto’s mid-term economic scorecard Add new comment Your name Comment About text formats Restricted HTML Allowed HTML tags: <a href hreflang> <em> <strong> <cite> <blockquote cite> <code> <ul type> <ol start type> <li> <dl> <dt> <dd> <h2 id> <h3 id> <h4 id> <h5 id> <h6 id> Lines and paragraphs break automatically. Web page addresses and email addresses turn into links automatically. limit: 600 characters Leave this field blank Sign up to our newsletter Name Africa Check values your trust and is committed to the responsible management, use and protection of personal information. See our privacy policy. Leave this field blank Spot Checks View All false Nigeria Biafra Nnamdi Kanu arrest government No evidence Biafran pro-independence leader Nnamdi Kanu's wife and son arrested by Nigerian government scam Kenya government free online courses online scam No, Kenyan government not offering free online courses to all adults Kenya Economy William Ruto diaspora remittance revenue GDP #RutoRecordReport Precision or spin? Evaluating Kenyan president Ruto’s mid-term economic scorecard We hold public figures accountable For democracy to function, public figures need to be held to account for what they say. The claims they make need to be checked, openly and impartially. Africa Check is an independent, non-partisan organisation which assesses claims made in the public arena using journalistic skills and evidence drawn from the latest online tools, readers, public sources and experts, sorting fact from fiction and publishing the results. Browse by category Health Covid-19 Education Crime Economy Kenya Nigeria Senegal South Africa Sign up to our newsletter Name Africa Check values your trust and is committed to the responsible management, use and protection of personal information. See our privacy policy. Leave this field blank Follow us Facebook Twitter Instagram TikTok Footer About Partner With Us Terms and Conditions Contact Us Sitemap Want to keep reading our fact-checks? We will never charge you for verified, reliable information. Help us keep it that way by supporting our work. Become a newsletter subscriber Name Africa Check values your trust and is committed to the responsible management, use and protection of personal information. See our privacy policy. Leave this field blank Support independent fact-checking in Africa. See our donation optionsHunter Biden: What was he doing in China and Ukraine? Skip to content British Broadcasting Corporation Home News Sport Business Innovation Culture Arts Travel Earth Audio Video Live Home News Israel-Gaza War War in Ukraine US & Canada UK UK Politics England N. Ireland N. Ireland Politics Scotland Scotland Politics Wales Wales Politics Africa Asia China India Australia Europe Latin America Middle East In Pictures BBC InDepth BBC Verify Sport Business Executive Lounge Technology of Business Future of Business Innovation Technology Science & Health Artificial Intelligence AI v the Mind Culture Film & TV Music Art & Design Style Books Entertainment News Arts Arts in Motion Travel Destinations Africa Antarctica Asia Australia and Pacific Caribbean & Bermuda Central America Europe Middle East North America South America World’s Table Culture & Experiences Adventures The SpeciaList Earth Natural Wonders Weather & Science Climate Solutions Sustainable Business Green Living Audio Podcasts Radio Audio FAQs Video Live Live News Live Sport Home News Sport Business Innovation Culture Arts Travel Earth Audio Video Live Weather Newsletters Hunter Biden: What was he doing in China and Ukraine? 6 April 2021 Share Save Share Save Getty Images Vice-President Biden in 2016 with his son Hunter looking on Hunter Biden, second son of US President Joe Biden, is being investigated by the Justice Department over his finances including, according to US media reports, some of his business dealings in China. During the 2020 election campaign, he and his father were frequently accused by Donald Trump and his associates of wrongdoing in regards to China and Ukraine, allegations which they both denied. The New York Post reported on an alleged email in which an adviser from a Ukrainian energy company, Burisma, apparently thanked Hunter for inviting him to meet his father, Joe Biden. Asked about the allegations, Joe Biden told a reporter it was a "smear campaign". No criminal activity has been proven, and no evidence has emerged that Mr Biden did anything to intentionally benefit his son. In an interview with the BBC months after his father was sworn in as president, Hunter Biden defended his qualifications for the position at Burisma but added that, in retrospect, he had "missed... the perception that I would create". Claims of influence-peddling are common in Washington DC and Mr Trump's children have also been accused of conflicts of interest in lucrative business deals overseas. They, too, deny wrongdoing. What do we know about the federal investigation? The Justice Department is investigating Hunter Biden's finances including scrutinising some of his past Chinese business dealings and other transactions, a "person familiar with the matter" told The Associated Press in December . The tax investigation was launched in 2018 but Hunter Biden said he had learned about it for the first time in December 2020. Asked about the investigation by US broadcaster CBS this April, the president's son said: "I'm co-operating, completely. And I'm absolutely certain, 100% certain, that at the end of the investigation, that I will be cleared of any wrongdoing." What have the Bidens been accused of in China? The New York Post cited a purported email from Hunter Biden in August 2017 indicating he was receiving a $10m annual fee from a Chinese billionaire for "introductions alone", though it is unclear who was involved in the alleged introductions. Another purported email, which Fox News said it had confirmed, reportedly refers to a deal pursued by Hunter involving China's largest private energy firm. It is said to include a cryptic mention of "10 held by H for the big guy". Fox News cited unnamed sources as saying "the big guy" in the purported email was a reference to Joe Biden. This message is said to be from May 2017. Both emails would date from when the former US vice-president was a private citizen. A former business associate of Hunter Biden has come forward to say he can confirm the allegations. Tony Bobulinski told Fox News that, contrary to Joe Biden's statements that he had nothing to do with his son's business affairs, Hunter had "frequently referenced asking him for his sign-off or advice on various potential deals" in China. Mr Bobulinski, who is reportedly a US Navy veteran, separately told Fox News' Tucker Carlson that he had met on two occasions with Joe Biden to discuss business deals with China, the first time in May 2017 when Barack Obama's former vice-president was a private citizen. He says he asked Joe Biden's brother, James, whether the family was concerned about possible scrutiny of the former vice-president's involvement in a potential business deal with a Chinese entity. Mr Bobulinski told Fox News that James Biden had replied: "Plausible deniability." Mr Bobulinski was invited by Mr Trump to be his guest at the final presidential debate in Nashville, Tennessee on 22 October. What is known about Hunter's dealings in China? In 2013, Hunter flew aboard Air Force Two with his father, who was then vice-president, on an official visit to Beijing, where the younger Biden met investment banker Jonathan Li. Hunter told the New Yorker he had just met Mr Li for "a cup of coffee", but 12 days after the trip a private equity fund, BHR Partners, was approved by the Chinese authorities. Mr Li was chief executive and Hunter was a board member. He would hold a 10% stake. Getty Images Joe Biden walks out of Air Force Two with his granddaughter and son, Hunter Biden BHR is backed by some of China's largest state banks and by local governments, according to US media. Hunter Biden's lawyer said he had joined the board in an unpaid position "based on his interest in seeking ways to bring Chinese capital to international markets". His lawyer also said his client did not acquire his financial stake in BHR until 2017, after his father had left office in the US. Hunter resigned from the board of BHR in April 2020, but still held his 10% stake in BHR as of July this year, according to the company report. What did the New York Post say about Hunter Biden and Ukraine? The New York Post reported an email from April 2015, in which an adviser to Burisma, Vadym Pozharskyi, apparently thanked Hunter Biden for inviting him to meet his father in Washington. Hunter was a director on the board of Burisma - a Ukrainian-owned private energy company while his father was the Obama administration's pointman on US-Ukrainian relations. Hunter was one of several foreigners on its board. The New York Post article did not provide evidence that the meeting had ever taken place. The Biden election campaign said there was no record of any such meeting on the former vice-president's "official schedule" from the time. But in a statement to Politico , the campaign also acknowledged that Mr Biden could have had an "informal interaction" with the Burisma adviser that did not appear on his official schedule, though it said any such encounter would have been "cursory". "Investigations by the press, during impeachment, and even by two Republican-led Senate committees whose work was decried as 'not legitimate' and political by a GOP colleague, have all reached the same conclusion: that Joe Biden carried out official US policy toward Ukraine and engaged in no wrongdoing," said Andrew Bates, a spokesman for Mr Biden. What we know about Biden-Ukraine corruption claims Mr Biden's team has also decried the New York Post story as "Russian disinformation", though it did not say the emails were bogus. The New York Post article was shared by President Trump and his allies. Two of his former advisers, Steve Bannon and Rudy Giuliani, were involved in providing the story and the hard drive containing the alleged emails, to the newspaper. Mr Giuliani says the messages were found on a laptop that Hunter dropped off at a Delaware repair shop in April 2019. Sceptics have noted that Mr Giuliani travelled in December 2019 to Kyiv where he met Ukrainian lawmaker Andriy Derkach, whom the US Treasury has designated as a longtime Kremlin agent. Mr Giuliani has acknowledged trying dig up dirt on the Bidens in Ukraine. But the US Director of National Intelligence, John Ratcliffe, told Fox Business that the purported emails were not connected to a Russian disinformation effort. Other US media say they have been unable to verify the authenticity of the emails. Hunter has neither confirmed nor denied that he dropped off a laptop at the location. Hunter joined Burisma in 2014, and remained on the board until April 2019, when he decided to leave. Speaking to the BBC, he said Burisma had seen his name "as gold" and that it had played a large part in his appointment to the board. Twitter and Facebook's action over Joe Biden article reignites bias claims What are the Bidens accused of in Ukraine? Donald Trump and his allies accused Joe Biden of wrongdoing because he had pushed, while vice-president, for the Ukrainian government to fire its top prosecutor, who was investigating the company for which Hunter worked. In 2016, Joe Biden called for the dismissal of Ukrainian prosecutor Viktor Shokin, whose office had Burisma and other companies under investigation. However, other Western leaders and major bodies that give financial support to Ukraine also wanted the prosecutor dismissed because they believed he was not active enough in tackling corruption. What else has the Biden campaign said? Shortly before the final presidential debate last year, the Democrat's camp released a statement denying wrongdoing. "Joe Biden has never even considered being involved in business with his family, nor in any overseas business whatsoever," said the statement. "He has never held stock in any such business arrangements nor has any family member or any other person ever held stock for him. "What is true is that Tony Bobulinski admitted on the record to Breitbart that he is angry that he was *not* able to go into business with Hunter and James Biden [Joe Biden's brother]." What did this have to do with impeachment? In 2019, details emerged of a phone call Mr Trump, the then president, had made to the president of Ukraine, in which he had urged the Ukrainian leader to investigate the Bidens. President Trump's impeachment explained This led to charges by the Democrats that Mr Trump was trying to illegally pressure Ukraine to help damage his election rival, resulting in impeachment by the House of Representatives. Mr Trump denied he had done anything wrong, and he was later acquitted by the Republican-controlled US Senate. Getty Images President Trump holds a copy of The Washington Post the day after the US Senate acquitted him on two articles of impeachment Has anything been proven against the Bidens? While no criminal activity has been proven, it has raised questions about potential conflicts of interest. A senior State Department official raised such concerns as far back as 2015. Joe Biden's son defends foreign dealings US Republican lawmakers launched an investigation and found last year that Hunter's work for the Ukrainian firm had been "problematic" - but there wasn't evidence that US foreign policy was influenced by it. No criminal charges were proven against Burisma either. The company issued a statement in 2017 saying "all legal proceedings and pending criminal allegations" against it were closed. Last year, Yuriy Lutsenko, the prosecutor in Ukraine who succeeded Viktor Shokin, told the BBC that there was no reason to investigate the Bidens under Ukrainian law. There is nothing illegal about sitting on a board of a company whilst family members serve in government. Hunter Biden's lawyers said in statement in October 2019 that he had undertaken "these business activities independently. He did not believe it appropriate to discuss them with his father, nor did he." Hunter told the New Yorker magazine that on the only occasion he had mentioned Burisma: "Dad said, 'I hope you know what you are doing.'" Amid all the scrutiny, Joe Biden promised last year that if he was elected president, no-one in his family would hold a job or have a business relationship with a foreign corporation or foreign government. Impeachment of Donald Trump US election 2020 BBC Verify Hunter Biden Joe Biden Related Jeremy Bowen: Trump-Zelensky row signals looming crisis between Europe and US 1 Mar 2025 World 'The boss' featured at Trump hush-money trial 25 Apr 2024 US & Canada How did US impeachments go from rare to routine? 28 Sep 2023 US & Canada More 59 mins ago Joe Biden on Trump: 'What president ever talks like that? That's not who we are' Exclusive: The former president tells Nick Robinson his verdict on his successor's first 100 days and his "grave concern" for the future of the Atlantic Alliance 59 mins ago BBC InDepth 1 hr ago Trump appeasing Putin with pressure on Ukraine, Biden tells BBC In his first interview since leaving office, the 82-year-old criticises his successor's handling of the war and is challenged on his own record. 1 hr ago World 1 hr ago Watch: Biden's first interview since leaving the White House Former US President Joe Biden talks Trump, Russia and US-Europe relations with the BBC's Today programme. 1 hr ago US & Canada 2 days ago Trump's former VP Mike Pence receives JFK Courage Award Pence defied calls by Donald Trump to overturn the result of the 2020 election, and was shunned by Republicans as a result. 2 days ago US & Canada 25 Apr 2025 What would it mean for Ukraine to temporarily give up land? As Ukraine reckons with the terms of a possible peace deal, BBC Verify asks what it could mean in practice. 25 Apr 2025 BBC Verify British Broadcasting Corporation Home News Sport Business Innovation Culture Arts Travel Earth Audio Video Live Weather BBC Shop BritBox BBC in other languages Follow BBC on: Terms of Use About the BBC Privacy Policy Cookies Accessibility Help Contact the BBC Advertise with us Do not share or sell my info Contact technical support Copyright 2025 BBC. All rights reserved. The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites. Read about our approach to external linking.Hunter Biden: What was he doing in China and Ukraine? Skip to content British Broadcasting Corporation Home News Sport Business Innovation Culture Arts Travel Earth Audio Video Live Home News Israel-Gaza War War in Ukraine US & Canada UK UK Politics England N. Ireland N. Ireland Politics Scotland Scotland Politics Wales Wales Politics Africa Asia China India Australia Europe Latin America Middle East In Pictures BBC InDepth BBC Verify Sport Business Executive Lounge Technology of Business Future of Business Innovation Technology Science & Health Artificial Intelligence AI v the Mind Culture Film & TV Music Art & Design Style Books Entertainment News Arts Arts in Motion Travel Destinations Africa Antarctica Asia Australia and Pacific Caribbean & Bermuda Central America Europe Middle East North America South America World’s Table Culture & Experiences Adventures The SpeciaList Earth Natural Wonders Weather & Science Climate Solutions Sustainable Business Green Living Audio Podcasts Radio Audio FAQs Video Live Live News Live Sport Home News Sport Business Innovation Culture Arts Travel Earth Audio Video Live Weather Newsletters Hunter Biden: What was he doing in China and Ukraine? 6 April 2021 Share Save Share Save Getty Images Vice-President Biden in 2016 with his son Hunter looking on Hunter Biden, second son of US President Joe Biden, is being investigated by the Justice Department over his finances including, according to US media reports, some of his business dealings in China. During the 2020 election campaign, he and his father were frequently accused by Donald Trump and his associates of wrongdoing in regards to China and Ukraine, allegations which they both denied. The New York Post reported on an alleged email in which an adviser from a Ukrainian energy company, Burisma, apparently thanked Hunter for inviting him to meet his father, Joe Biden. Asked about the allegations, Joe Biden told a reporter it was a "smear campaign". No criminal activity has been proven, and no evidence has emerged that Mr Biden did anything to intentionally benefit his son. In an interview with the BBC months after his father was sworn in as president, Hunter Biden defended his qualifications for the position at Burisma but added that, in retrospect, he had "missed... the perception that I would create". Claims of influence-peddling are common in Washington DC and Mr Trump's children have also been accused of conflicts of interest in lucrative business deals overseas. They, too, deny wrongdoing. What do we know about the federal investigation? The Justice Department is investigating Hunter Biden's finances including scrutinising some of his past Chinese business dealings and other transactions, a "person familiar with the matter" told The Associated Press in December . The tax investigation was launched in 2018 but Hunter Biden said he had learned about it for the first time in December 2020. Asked about the investigation by US broadcaster CBS this April, the president's son said: "I'm co-operating, completely. And I'm absolutely certain, 100% certain, that at the end of the investigation, that I will be cleared of any wrongdoing." What have the Bidens been accused of in China? The New York Post cited a purported email from Hunter Biden in August 2017 indicating he was receiving a $10m annual fee from a Chinese billionaire for "introductions alone", though it is unclear who was involved in the alleged introductions. Another purported email, which Fox News said it had confirmed, reportedly refers to a deal pursued by Hunter involving China's largest private energy firm. It is said to include a cryptic mention of "10 held by H for the big guy". Fox News cited unnamed sources as saying "the big guy" in the purported email was a reference to Joe Biden. This message is said to be from May 2017. Both emails would date from when the former US vice-president was a private citizen. A former business associate of Hunter Biden has come forward to say he can confirm the allegations. Tony Bobulinski told Fox News that, contrary to Joe Biden's statements that he had nothing to do with his son's business affairs, Hunter had "frequently referenced asking him for his sign-off or advice on various potential deals" in China. Mr Bobulinski, who is reportedly a US Navy veteran, separately told Fox News' Tucker Carlson that he had met on two occasions with Joe Biden to discuss business deals with China, the first time in May 2017 when Barack Obama's former vice-president was a private citizen. He says he asked Joe Biden's brother, James, whether the family was concerned about possible scrutiny of the former vice-president's involvement in a potential business deal with a Chinese entity. Mr Bobulinski told Fox News that James Biden had replied: "Plausible deniability." Mr Bobulinski was invited by Mr Trump to be his guest at the final presidential debate in Nashville, Tennessee on 22 October. What is known about Hunter's dealings in China? In 2013, Hunter flew aboard Air Force Two with his father, who was then vice-president, on an official visit to Beijing, where the younger Biden met investment banker Jonathan Li. Hunter told the New Yorker he had just met Mr Li for "a cup of coffee", but 12 days after the trip a private equity fund, BHR Partners, was approved by the Chinese authorities. Mr Li was chief executive and Hunter was a board member. He would hold a 10% stake. Getty Images Joe Biden walks out of Air Force Two with his granddaughter and son, Hunter Biden BHR is backed by some of China's largest state banks and by local governments, according to US media. Hunter Biden's lawyer said he had joined the board in an unpaid position "based on his interest in seeking ways to bring Chinese capital to international markets". His lawyer also said his client did not acquire his financial stake in BHR until 2017, after his father had left office in the US. Hunter resigned from the board of BHR in April 2020, but still held his 10% stake in BHR as of July this year, according to the company report. What did the New York Post say about Hunter Biden and Ukraine? The New York Post reported an email from April 2015, in which an adviser to Burisma, Vadym Pozharskyi, apparently thanked Hunter Biden for inviting him to meet his father in Washington. Hunter was a director on the board of Burisma - a Ukrainian-owned private energy company while his father was the Obama administration's pointman on US-Ukrainian relations. Hunter was one of several foreigners on its board. The New York Post article did not provide evidence that the meeting had ever taken place. The Biden election campaign said there was no record of any such meeting on the former vice-president's "official schedule" from the time. But in a statement to Politico , the campaign also acknowledged that Mr Biden could have had an "informal interaction" with the Burisma adviser that did not appear on his official schedule, though it said any such encounter would have been "cursory". "Investigations by the press, during impeachment, and even by two Republican-led Senate committees whose work was decried as 'not legitimate' and political by a GOP colleague, have all reached the same conclusion: that Joe Biden carried out official US policy toward Ukraine and engaged in no wrongdoing," said Andrew Bates, a spokesman for Mr Biden. What we know about Biden-Ukraine corruption claims Mr Biden's team has also decried the New York Post story as "Russian disinformation", though it did not say the emails were bogus. The New York Post article was shared by President Trump and his allies. Two of his former advisers, Steve Bannon and Rudy Giuliani, were involved in providing the story and the hard drive containing the alleged emails, to the newspaper. Mr Giuliani says the messages were found on a laptop that Hunter dropped off at a Delaware repair shop in April 2019. Sceptics have noted that Mr Giuliani travelled in December 2019 to Kyiv where he met Ukrainian lawmaker Andriy Derkach, whom the US Treasury has designated as a longtime Kremlin agent. Mr Giuliani has acknowledged trying dig up dirt on the Bidens in Ukraine. But the US Director of National Intelligence, John Ratcliffe, told Fox Business that the purported emails were not connected to a Russian disinformation effort. Other US media say they have been unable to verify the authenticity of the emails. Hunter has neither confirmed nor denied that he dropped off a laptop at the location. Hunter joined Burisma in 2014, and remained on the board until April 2019, when he decided to leave. Speaking to the BBC, he said Burisma had seen his name "as gold" and that it had played a large part in his appointment to the board. Twitter and Facebook's action over Joe Biden article reignites bias claims What are the Bidens accused of in Ukraine? Donald Trump and his allies accused Joe Biden of wrongdoing because he had pushed, while vice-president, for the Ukrainian government to fire its top prosecutor, who was investigating the company for which Hunter worked. In 2016, Joe Biden called for the dismissal of Ukrainian prosecutor Viktor Shokin, whose office had Burisma and other companies under investigation. However, other Western leaders and major bodies that give financial support to Ukraine also wanted the prosecutor dismissed because they believed he was not active enough in tackling corruption. What else has the Biden campaign said? Shortly before the final presidential debate last year, the Democrat's camp released a statement denying wrongdoing. "Joe Biden has never even considered being involved in business with his family, nor in any overseas business whatsoever," said the statement. "He has never held stock in any such business arrangements nor has any family member or any other person ever held stock for him. "What is true is that Tony Bobulinski admitted on the record to Breitbart that he is angry that he was *not* able to go into business with Hunter and James Biden [Joe Biden's brother]." What did this have to do with impeachment? In 2019, details emerged of a phone call Mr Trump, the then president, had made to the president of Ukraine, in which he had urged the Ukrainian leader to investigate the Bidens. President Trump's impeachment explained This led to charges by the Democrats that Mr Trump was trying to illegally pressure Ukraine to help damage his election rival, resulting in impeachment by the House of Representatives. Mr Trump denied he had done anything wrong, and he was later acquitted by the Republican-controlled US Senate. Getty Images President Trump holds a copy of The Washington Post the day after the US Senate acquitted him on two articles of impeachment Has anything been proven against the Bidens? While no criminal activity has been proven, it has raised questions about potential conflicts of interest. A senior State Department official raised such concerns as far back as 2015. Joe Biden's son defends foreign dealings US Republican lawmakers launched an investigation and found last year that Hunter's work for the Ukrainian firm had been "problematic" - but there wasn't evidence that US foreign policy was influenced by it. No criminal charges were proven against Burisma either. The company issued a statement in 2017 saying "all legal proceedings and pending criminal allegations" against it were closed. Last year, Yuriy Lutsenko, the prosecutor in Ukraine who succeeded Viktor Shokin, told the BBC that there was no reason to investigate the Bidens under Ukrainian law. There is nothing illegal about sitting on a board of a company whilst family members serve in government. Hunter Biden's lawyers said in statement in October 2019 that he had undertaken "these business activities independently. He did not believe it appropriate to discuss them with his father, nor did he." Hunter told the New Yorker magazine that on the only occasion he had mentioned Burisma: "Dad said, 'I hope you know what you are doing.'" Amid all the scrutiny, Joe Biden promised last year that if he was elected president, no-one in his family would hold a job or have a business relationship with a foreign corporation or foreign government. Impeachment of Donald Trump US election 2020 BBC Verify Hunter Biden Joe Biden Related Jeremy Bowen: Trump-Zelensky row signals looming crisis between Europe and US 1 Mar 2025 World 'The boss' featured at Trump hush-money trial 25 Apr 2024 US & Canada How did US impeachments go from rare to routine? 28 Sep 2023 US & Canada More 1 hr ago Joe Biden on Trump: 'What president ever talks like that? That's not who we are' Exclusive: The former president tells Nick Robinson his verdict on his successor's first 100 days and his "grave concern" for the future of the Atlantic Alliance 1 hr ago BBC InDepth 1 hr ago Trump appeasing Putin with pressure on Ukraine, Biden tells BBC In his first interview since leaving office, the 82-year-old criticises his successor's handling of the war and is challenged on his own record. 1 hr ago World 1 hr ago Watch: Biden's first interview since leaving the White House Former US President Joe Biden talks Trump, Russia and US-Europe relations with the BBC's Today programme. 1 hr ago US & Canada 2 days ago Trump's former VP Mike Pence receives JFK Courage Award Pence defied calls by Donald Trump to overturn the result of the 2020 election, and was shunned by Republicans as a result. 2 days ago US & Canada 25 Apr 2025 What would it mean for Ukraine to temporarily give up land? As Ukraine reckons with the terms of a possible peace deal, BBC Verify asks what it could mean in practice. 25 Apr 2025 BBC Verify British Broadcasting Corporation Home News Sport Business Innovation Culture Arts Travel Earth Audio Video Live Weather BBC Shop BritBox BBC in other languages Follow BBC on: Terms of Use About the BBC Privacy Policy Cookies Accessibility Help Contact the BBC Advertise with us Do not share or sell my info Contact technical support Copyright 2025 BBC. All rights reserved. The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites. Read about our approach to external linking.The Bidens’ Influence Peddling Timeline - United States House Committee on Oversight and Accountability Skip to main content Toggle navigation Search About Chairman James Comer Full Committee Rules Committee Activity Calendar Hearings Letters Markups Reports Forums Subcommittees Cybersecurity, Information Technology, and Government Innovation Economic Growth, Energy Policy, and Regulatory Affairs Government Operations Health Care and Financial Services Military and Foreign Affairs Federal Law Enforcement Delivering on Government Efficiency Task Force on the Declassification of Federal Secrets Media Center Press Releases The Overview Biden Family Investigation The Bidens’ Influence Peddling Timeline Biden's Border Crisis COVID Origins Blow the Whistle The Bidens’ Influence Peddling Timeline Since taking the gavel in January, the Committee on Oversight and Accountability has accelerated its investigation of the Biden family’s domestic and international business practices to determine whether the Biden family has been targeted by foreign actors, President Biden is compromised, and our national security is threatened. Records obtained through the Committee’s subpoenas to date reveal that the Bidens and their associates have received over $20 million in payments from foreign entities. Below is a timeline that details key dates in our investigation. The main points of interest are: 1) Romania: On September 28, 2015, Vice President Biden welcomed Romanian President Klaus Iohannis to the White House. Within five weeks of this meeting, a Romanian businessman involved with a high-profile corruption prosecution in Romania, Gabriel Popoviciu, began depositing a Biden associate’s bank account, which ultimately made their way into Biden family accounts. Popoviciu made sixteen of the seventeen payments, totaling over $3 million, to the Biden associate account while Joe Biden was Vice President. Biden family accounts ultimately received approximately $1.038 million. The total amount from Romania to the Biden family and their associates is over $3 million. 2) China- CEFC: On March 1, 2017—less than two months after Vice President Joe Biden left public office—State Energy HK Limited, a Chinese company, wired $3 million to a Biden associate’s account. This is the same bank account used in the above “Romania” section. After the Chinese company wired the Biden associate account the $3 million, the Biden family received approximately $1,065,692 over a three-month period in different bank accounts. Additionally, the CEFC Chairman gives Hunter Biden a diamond worth $80,000. Lastly, CEFC creates a joint venture with the Bidens in the summer of 2017. The timeline lays out the “WhatsApp” messages and subsequent wires from the Chinese to the Bidens of $100,000 and $5 million. The total amount from China, specifically with CEFC and their related entities, to the Biden family and their associates is over $8 million. 3) Kazakhstan: On April 22, 2014, Kenes Rakishev, a Kazakhstani oligarch used his Singaporean entity, Novatus Holdings, to wire one of Hunter Biden’s Rosemont Seneca entities $142,300. The very next day—April 23, 2014—the Rosemont Seneca entity transferred the exact same amount of money to a car dealership for a car for Hunter Biden. Hunter Biden and Devon Archer would represent Burisma in Kazakhstan in May/June of 2014 as the company attempted to broker a three-way deal among Burisma, the Kazakhstan government, and a Chinese state-owned energy company. 4) Ukraine: Devon Archer joined the Burisma board of directors in spring of 2014 and was joined by Hunter Biden shortly thereafter. Hunter Biden joined the company as counsel, but after a meeting with Burisma owner Mykola Zlochevsky in Lake Como, Italy, was elevated to the board of directors in the spring of 2014. Both Biden and Archer were each paid $1 million per year for their positions on the board of directors. In December 2015, after a Burisma board of directors meeting, Zlochevsky and Hunter Biden “called D.C.” in the wake of mounting pressures the company was facing. Zlochevsky was later charged with bribing Ukrainian officials with $6 million in an attempt to delay or drop the investigation into his company. The total amount from Ukraine to the Biden family and their associates is $6.5 million. 5) Russia: On February 14, 2014, a Russian oligarch and Russia’s richest woman, Yelena Baturina, wired a Rosemont Seneca entity $3.5 million. On March 11, 2014, the wire was split up: $750,000 was transferred to Devon Archer, and the remainder was sent to Rosemont Seneca Bohai, a company Devon Archer and Hunter Biden split equally. In spring of 2014, Yelena Baturina joined Hunter Biden and Devon Archer to share a meal with then-Vice President Biden at a restaurant in Washington, D.C. The total amount from Russia to the Biden family and their associates is $3.5 million. Beyond this timeline, here are links to our First , Second , Third , and Fourth Bank Memorandums that provide detailed descriptions and show actual bank records and wires. Biden Family Timeline China – BHR China- CEFC Hunter Biden Criminal Investigation Kazakhstan Romania Russia Ukraine 2009 January 20, 2009 Important Date Obama-Biden Administration begins. 2013 November 1, 2013 China – BHR Hunter Biden, business associate, and Chinese investors agree to create Bohai Harvest RST Equity Investment Fund Management Co., Ltd. (BHR), an investment fund controlled by the Bank of China, to focus on mergers and acquisitions, and investment in and reforms of state-owned enterprise. December 4, 2013 China – BHR Vice President Biden travels with Hunter Biden on Air Force 2 to China and meets CEO of BHR, Jonathan Li. Shortly thereafter, BHR’s business license was approved and Hunter Biden was a board member. 2014 February 5, 2014 Kazakhstan Hunter Biden met Kazakhstani oligarch Kenes Rakishev at the Hay Adams Hotel in Washington, D.C. In email correspondences with Devon Archer surrounding the meeting, Rakishev requested Secretary of State John Kerry visit Kazakhstan. Archer replied, “if we have some business started as planned I will ensure its planned soonest.” Rakishev is a Kazakhstani oligarch and millionaire and was a director at Kazakhstan’s state-owned oil company KazMunayGas. Rakishev maintained close ties to Karim Massimov, who became prime minister on April 2, 2014. February 14, 2014 Russia Russian oligarch Yelena Baturina – the wealthiest woman in Russia and then married to the former mayor of Moscow—wired the Rosemont Seneca Thornton bank account $3.5 million. Rosemont Seneca Thornton’s beneficiary was Rosemont Seneca Partners, of which Hunter Biden was the chairman. March 11, 2014 Russia Rosemont Seneca Thornton transferred $2,752,711 to a Rosemont Seneca Bohai bank account. Also on March 11, 2014, $750,000 of the original wire from Baturina was sent to Devon Archer from Rosemont Seneca Thornton. Rosemont Seneca Bohai was an entity used by both Hunter Biden and Devon Archer. In his testimony to the Committee, Archer confirmed that he and Hunter Biden were 50-50 owners in Rosemont Seneca Bohai. Rosemont Seneca Bohai was opened in Delaware on February 13, 2014—the day before the $3.5 million wire from Yelena Baturina. The bank records can be found in the third bank records memo. April 1, 2014 Russia and Kazakhstan In the spring of 2014, after Yelena Baturina sent the $3.5 million wire to Rosemont Seneca Thornton and around the same time that Kenes Rakishev wired money to Rosemont Seneca Bohai for Hunter Biden’s sportscar, Vice President Biden attended dinner with Yelena Baturina, Kenes Rakishev, Karim Massimov, Hunter Biden, Devon Archer, and others at Café Milano in Washington, D.C. Joe Biden stayed for dinner. Devon Archer provided this information during his transcribed interview . April 15, 2014 Ukraine Burisma, a Ukrainian energy company, appoints Biden business associate to their board of directors. April 22, 2014 Kazakhstan Kenes Rakishev’s Singaporean company wires $142,300 through his Latvian company to a Rosemont entity. The details can be found in the third bank records memorandum . April 22, 2014 Ukraine Vice President Biden travels to Ukraine and gives an anti-corruption speech. April 23, 2014 Kazakhstan The Rosemont entity wires $142,300 to a car dealership in New Jersey for a new sports car for Hunter Biden. The details can be found in the third bank records memorandum . May 12, 2014 Ukraine Burisma announces Hunter Biden joined its board of directors. May 21, 2014 Romania Vice President Biden visits Romania and delivers a speech to the Romanian Prime Minister, judges, prosecutors, and leaders of the Romanian Parliament. September 12, 2014 China – BHR BHR invests $1.7 billion in CCP-linked petroleum and chemical company. December 9, 2014 China – BHR Hunter Biden and business associate invest $484,920 into BHR. December 22, 2014 Kazakhstan Kenes Rakishev’s Kazakhstani oil company and Burisma join with a CCP-linked company and announce a transnational financial arrangement. 2015 April 16, 2015 Ukraine and Kazakhstan On April 16, 2015, Vice President Joe Biden attended a dinner with Karim Massimov, Vadym Pozharsky, Hunter Biden, Devon Archer, and others at Café Milano in Washington, D.C. Devon Archer provided this information during his transcribed interview . September 15, 2015 China – BHR BHR joins with a CCP-linked entity to acquire US-based Henniges Automotive in a deal reportedly worth $600 million. September 28, 2015 Romania Vice President Biden welcomes Romanian President Klaus Iohannis to the White House. A readout of the meeting states, the “Vice President welcomed President Iohannis’ focus on anti-corruption efforts and rule of law as a means to strengthen national security and promote greater investment and economic growth.” President Iohannis said the Vice President “voiced satisfaction over Romania’s progress with the fight against corruption.” November 2, 2015 Ukraine Vadym Pozharskyi suggests high level U.S. level officials come to Ukraine and talk with Prosecutor General Viktor Shokin and President Petro Poroshenko about Mykola Zlochevsky’s investigations. Prosecutor General Shokin was investigating Burisma and Burisma’s owner, Zlochevsky for fraud. Prosecutor General Shokin is the Ukranian government official Vice President Biden demanded Poroshenko fire. November 5, 2015 Romania Romanian businessman, Gabriel Popoviciu, begins making deposits into Robinson Walker, LLC’s bank account. Robinson Walker, LLC is an entity owned by a Biden associate, Rob Walker. Popoviciu’s company sent Robinson Walker the first wire for $179,836.86. From November 2015 to May 2017, Popoviciu’s company paid Robinson Walker, LLC over $3 million. Biden family accounts received approximately $1.038 million from the Robinson Walker, LLC account after Popoviciu’s deposits. Sixteen of the seventeen payments from Popoviciu’s company to Robinson Walker, LLC were made while Joe Biden was Vice President. Details can be found in the Second Bank Records Memorandum . November 6, 2015 Ukraine Amos Hochstein, a high level U.S. government offical working in the Obama-Biden Administration, meets with Hunter Biden and discusses Burisma. November 9, 2015 Romania Rob Walker’s account wires Hunter Biden $59,900. Details can be found in the Second Bank Records Memorandum. November 11, 2015 Ukraine Amos Hochstein meets with Vice President Biden in the West Wing. November 12, 2015 Ukraine Amos Hochstein calls Hunter Biden. November 13, 2015 Romania Hunter Biden meets with the U.S. Ambassador to Romania. November 13, 2015 Ukraine VP Biden touched down in Ukraine last night. Read his initial notes from the road: https://t.co/FdPysDjiqT pic.twitter.com/ybZFp7frYe — VP Biden (Archived) (@VP44) December 7, 2015 Vice President Biden announces trip to Ukraine to take place the first week of December 2015. November 14, 2015 Ukraine Vadym Pozharskyi emails Hunter Biden confirmation that the Vice President will be traveling to Ukraine. November 14, 2015 Romania Hunter Biden meets with the Ambassador of Romania to the United States. November 15, 2015 Romania Hunter Biden travels to Romania. December 4, 2015 Ukraine Mykola Zlochevsky and Vadym Pozharsky complain about constant “government pressures” and urge Hunter Biden to call the Vice President of the United States, Joe Biden. Devon Archer testified that Hunter Biden, Zlochevsky, and Pozharsky “called D.C.” Devon Archer provided this information during his transcribed interview . December 7, 2015 China – CEFC Hunter Biden and CEFC Chairman Ye Jianming begin communicating regarding a possible U.S. partnership. December 7, 2015 Romania Robinson Walker, LLC wires Hunter Biden $59,725. Details can be found in the Second Bank Records Memorandum. December 7, 2015 Ukraine https://oversight.house.gov/wp-content/uploads/2023/07/Biden-Firing-Ukraine-Prosecutor-Clip.mp4 Vice President Biden arrives in Ukraine, where he demands Prosecutor General Shokin be fired if Ukraine wants $1 billion in International Monetary Fund (IMF) loans. December 9, 2015 Ukraine Vice President Biden departs Ukraine and gets a commitment from President Poroshenko that Prosecutor General Shokin will be fired. December 17, 2015 Ukraine Vice President Biden hosts a holiday party at the Vice Presidential residence, which Amos Hochstein and Hunter Biden both attend. December 23, 2015 Romania Robinson Walker, LLC wires Hunter Biden $60,091.24. Details can be found in the Second Bank Records Memorandum . 2016 January 20, 2016 Ukraine Vice President Biden meets with President Poroshenko in Switzerland at the World Economic Forum where Biden reinforced the linkage between the loan guarantee and the necessary reforms. February 4, 2016 Ukraine Mykola Zlochevsky gives Hunter Biden unspecified, extravagant birthday gifts. February 11, 2016 Ukraine Vice President Biden and President Poroshenko conduct a call. February 12, 2016 Romania Robinson Walker, LLC wires Hunter Biden’s Owasco P.C. $61,126.24. Details can be found in the Second Bank Records Memorandum. February 16, 2016 Ukraine President Poroshenko asks Prosecutor General Shokin to resign. February 18, 2016 Ukraine Vice President Biden calls President Poroshenko to thank him for calling on Prosecutor General Shokin to resign. February 19, 2016 Ukraine President Poroshenko says he recieved Prosecutor General Shokin’s letter of resignation. March 24, 2016 Romania Robinson Walker, LLC wires Owasco P.C. $61,816.05. Details can be found in the Second Bank Records Memorandum. March 29, 2016 Romania Hunter Biden meets again with U.S. Ambassador to Romania. March 29, 2016 Ukraine Ukranian Parliament approves President Poroshenko’s firing of Prosecutor General Shokin. May 23, 2016 Romania Robinson Walker, LLC wires Owasco P.C. $123,830.80. Details can be found in the Second Bank Records Memorandum. May 23, 2016 Romania Robinson Walker, LLC wires Owasco P.C. $53,419.74. Details can be found in the Second Bank Records Memorandum. July 11, 2016 Romania Robinson Walker, LLC wires Owasco P.C. $116,860.93. Details can be found in the Second Bank Records Memorandum. Load More Share via Email About Chairman James Comer Full Committee Rules Committee Activity Calendar Hearings Letters Markups Reports Forums Subcommittees Cybersecurity, Information Technology, and Government Innovation Economic Growth, Energy Policy, and Regulatory Affairs Government Operations Health Care and Financial Services Military and Foreign Affairs Federal Law Enforcement Delivering on Government Efficiency Task Force on the Declassification of Federal Secrets Media Center Press Releases The Overview Biden Family Investigation The Bidens’ Influence Peddling Timeline Biden's Border Crisis COVID Origins Blow the Whistle Minority © 2025 Committee on Oversight and Government Reform Privacy Policy 2157 Rayburn House Office Building Washington, DC 20515 Phone: (202) 225-5074 Fax: (202) 225-3974 Search About Chairman James Comer Full Committee Rules Committee Activity Calendar Hearings Letters Markups Reports Forums Subcommittees Cybersecurity, Information Technology, and Government Innovation Economic Growth, Energy Policy, and Regulatory Affairs Government Operations Health Care and Financial Services Military and Foreign Affairs Federal Law Enforcement Delivering on Government Efficiency Task Force on the Declassification of Federal Secrets Media Center Press Releases The Overview Biden Family Investigation The Bidens’ Influence Peddling Timeline Biden's Border Crisis COVID Origins Blow the WhistleHunter Biden: What was he doing in China and Ukraine? Skip to content British Broadcasting Corporation Home News Sport Business Innovation Culture Arts Travel Earth Audio Video Live Home News Israel-Gaza War War in Ukraine US & Canada UK UK Politics England N. Ireland N. Ireland Politics Scotland Scotland Politics Wales Wales Politics Africa Asia China India Australia Europe Latin America Middle East In Pictures BBC InDepth BBC Verify Sport Business Executive Lounge Technology of Business Future of Business Innovation Technology Science & Health Artificial Intelligence AI v the Mind Culture Film & TV Music Art & Design Style Books Entertainment News Arts Arts in Motion Travel Destinations Africa Antarctica Asia Australia and Pacific Caribbean & Bermuda Central America Europe Middle East North America South America World’s Table Culture & Experiences Adventures The SpeciaList Earth Natural Wonders Weather & Science Climate Solutions Sustainable Business Green Living Audio Podcasts Radio Audio FAQs Video Live Live News Live Sport Home News Sport Business Innovation Culture Arts Travel Earth Audio Video Live Weather Newsletters Hunter Biden: What was he doing in China and Ukraine? 6 April 2021 Share Save Share Save Getty Images Vice-President Biden in 2016 with his son Hunter looking on Hunter Biden, second son of US President Joe Biden, is being investigated by the Justice Department over his finances including, according to US media reports, some of his business dealings in China. During the 2020 election campaign, he and his father were frequently accused by Donald Trump and his associates of wrongdoing in regards to China and Ukraine, allegations which they both denied. The New York Post reported on an alleged email in which an adviser from a Ukrainian energy company, Burisma, apparently thanked Hunter for inviting him to meet his father, Joe Biden. Asked about the allegations, Joe Biden told a reporter it was a "smear campaign". No criminal activity has been proven, and no evidence has emerged that Mr Biden did anything to intentionally benefit his son. In an interview with the BBC months after his father was sworn in as president, Hunter Biden defended his qualifications for the position at Burisma but added that, in retrospect, he had "missed... the perception that I would create". Claims of influence-peddling are common in Washington DC and Mr Trump's children have also been accused of conflicts of interest in lucrative business deals overseas. They, too, deny wrongdoing. What do we know about the federal investigation? The Justice Department is investigating Hunter Biden's finances including scrutinising some of his past Chinese business dealings and other transactions, a "person familiar with the matter" told The Associated Press in December . The tax investigation was launched in 2018 but Hunter Biden said he had learned about it for the first time in December 2020. Asked about the investigation by US broadcaster CBS this April, the president's son said: "I'm co-operating, completely. And I'm absolutely certain, 100% certain, that at the end of the investigation, that I will be cleared of any wrongdoing." What have the Bidens been accused of in China? The New York Post cited a purported email from Hunter Biden in August 2017 indicating he was receiving a $10m annual fee from a Chinese billionaire for "introductions alone", though it is unclear who was involved in the alleged introductions. Another purported email, which Fox News said it had confirmed, reportedly refers to a deal pursued by Hunter involving China's largest private energy firm. It is said to include a cryptic mention of "10 held by H for the big guy". Fox News cited unnamed sources as saying "the big guy" in the purported email was a reference to Joe Biden. This message is said to be from May 2017. Both emails would date from when the former US vice-president was a private citizen. A former business associate of Hunter Biden has come forward to say he can confirm the allegations. Tony Bobulinski told Fox News that, contrary to Joe Biden's statements that he had nothing to do with his son's business affairs, Hunter had "frequently referenced asking him for his sign-off or advice on various potential deals" in China. Mr Bobulinski, who is reportedly a US Navy veteran, separately told Fox News' Tucker Carlson that he had met on two occasions with Joe Biden to discuss business deals with China, the first time in May 2017 when Barack Obama's former vice-president was a private citizen. He says he asked Joe Biden's brother, James, whether the family was concerned about possible scrutiny of the former vice-president's involvement in a potential business deal with a Chinese entity. Mr Bobulinski told Fox News that James Biden had replied: "Plausible deniability." Mr Bobulinski was invited by Mr Trump to be his guest at the final presidential debate in Nashville, Tennessee on 22 October. What is known about Hunter's dealings in China? In 2013, Hunter flew aboard Air Force Two with his father, who was then vice-president, on an official visit to Beijing, where the younger Biden met investment banker Jonathan Li. Hunter told the New Yorker he had just met Mr Li for "a cup of coffee", but 12 days after the trip a private equity fund, BHR Partners, was approved by the Chinese authorities. Mr Li was chief executive and Hunter was a board member. He would hold a 10% stake. Getty Images Joe Biden walks out of Air Force Two with his granddaughter and son, Hunter Biden BHR is backed by some of China's largest state banks and by local governments, according to US media. Hunter Biden's lawyer said he had joined the board in an unpaid position "based on his interest in seeking ways to bring Chinese capital to international markets". His lawyer also said his client did not acquire his financial stake in BHR until 2017, after his father had left office in the US. Hunter resigned from the board of BHR in April 2020, but still held his 10% stake in BHR as of July this year, according to the company report. What did the New York Post say about Hunter Biden and Ukraine? The New York Post reported an email from April 2015, in which an adviser to Burisma, Vadym Pozharskyi, apparently thanked Hunter Biden for inviting him to meet his father in Washington. Hunter was a director on the board of Burisma - a Ukrainian-owned private energy company while his father was the Obama administration's pointman on US-Ukrainian relations. Hunter was one of several foreigners on its board. The New York Post article did not provide evidence that the meeting had ever taken place. The Biden election campaign said there was no record of any such meeting on the former vice-president's "official schedule" from the time. But in a statement to Politico , the campaign also acknowledged that Mr Biden could have had an "informal interaction" with the Burisma adviser that did not appear on his official schedule, though it said any such encounter would have been "cursory". "Investigations by the press, during impeachment, and even by two Republican-led Senate committees whose work was decried as 'not legitimate' and political by a GOP colleague, have all reached the same conclusion: that Joe Biden carried out official US policy toward Ukraine and engaged in no wrongdoing," said Andrew Bates, a spokesman for Mr Biden. What we know about Biden-Ukraine corruption claims Mr Biden's team has also decried the New York Post story as "Russian disinformation", though it did not say the emails were bogus. The New York Post article was shared by President Trump and his allies. Two of his former advisers, Steve Bannon and Rudy Giuliani, were involved in providing the story and the hard drive containing the alleged emails, to the newspaper. Mr Giuliani says the messages were found on a laptop that Hunter dropped off at a Delaware repair shop in April 2019. Sceptics have noted that Mr Giuliani travelled in December 2019 to Kyiv where he met Ukrainian lawmaker Andriy Derkach, whom the US Treasury has designated as a longtime Kremlin agent. Mr Giuliani has acknowledged trying dig up dirt on the Bidens in Ukraine. But the US Director of National Intelligence, John Ratcliffe, told Fox Business that the purported emails were not connected to a Russian disinformation effort. Other US media say they have been unable to verify the authenticity of the emails. Hunter has neither confirmed nor denied that he dropped off a laptop at the location. Hunter joined Burisma in 2014, and remained on the board until April 2019, when he decided to leave. Speaking to the BBC, he said Burisma had seen his name "as gold" and that it had played a large part in his appointment to the board. Twitter and Facebook's action over Joe Biden article reignites bias claims What are the Bidens accused of in Ukraine? Donald Trump and his allies accused Joe Biden of wrongdoing because he had pushed, while vice-president, for the Ukrainian government to fire its top prosecutor, who was investigating the company for which Hunter worked. In 2016, Joe Biden called for the dismissal of Ukrainian prosecutor Viktor Shokin, whose office had Burisma and other companies under investigation. However, other Western leaders and major bodies that give financial support to Ukraine also wanted the prosecutor dismissed because they believed he was not active enough in tackling corruption. What else has the Biden campaign said? Shortly before the final presidential debate last year, the Democrat's camp released a statement denying wrongdoing. "Joe Biden has never even considered being involved in business with his family, nor in any overseas business whatsoever," said the statement. "He has never held stock in any such business arrangements nor has any family member or any other person ever held stock for him. "What is true is that Tony Bobulinski admitted on the record to Breitbart that he is angry that he was *not* able to go into business with Hunter and James Biden [Joe Biden's brother]." What did this have to do with impeachment? In 2019, details emerged of a phone call Mr Trump, the then president, had made to the president of Ukraine, in which he had urged the Ukrainian leader to investigate the Bidens. President Trump's impeachment explained This led to charges by the Democrats that Mr Trump was trying to illegally pressure Ukraine to help damage his election rival, resulting in impeachment by the House of Representatives. Mr Trump denied he had done anything wrong, and he was later acquitted by the Republican-controlled US Senate. Getty Images President Trump holds a copy of The Washington Post the day after the US Senate acquitted him on two articles of impeachment Has anything been proven against the Bidens? While no criminal activity has been proven, it has raised questions about potential conflicts of interest. A senior State Department official raised such concerns as far back as 2015. Joe Biden's son defends foreign dealings US Republican lawmakers launched an investigation and found last year that Hunter's work for the Ukrainian firm had been "problematic" - but there wasn't evidence that US foreign policy was influenced by it. No criminal charges were proven against Burisma either. The company issued a statement in 2017 saying "all legal proceedings and pending criminal allegations" against it were closed. Last year, Yuriy Lutsenko, the prosecutor in Ukraine who succeeded Viktor Shokin, told the BBC that there was no reason to investigate the Bidens under Ukrainian law. There is nothing illegal about sitting on a board of a company whilst family members serve in government. Hunter Biden's lawyers said in statement in October 2019 that he had undertaken "these business activities independently. He did not believe it appropriate to discuss them with his father, nor did he." Hunter told the New Yorker magazine that on the only occasion he had mentioned Burisma: "Dad said, 'I hope you know what you are doing.'" Amid all the scrutiny, Joe Biden promised last year that if he was elected president, no-one in his family would hold a job or have a business relationship with a foreign corporation or foreign government. Impeachment of Donald Trump US election 2020 BBC Verify Hunter Biden Joe Biden Related Jeremy Bowen: Trump-Zelensky row signals looming crisis between Europe and US 1 Mar 2025 World 'The boss' featured at Trump hush-money trial 25 Apr 2024 US & Canada How did US impeachments go from rare to routine? 28 Sep 2023 US & Canada More 2 hrs ago Joe Biden on Trump: 'What president ever talks like that? That's not who we are' Exclusive: The former president tells Nick Robinson his verdict on his successor's first 100 days and his "grave concern" for the future of the Atlantic Alliance 2 hrs ago BBC InDepth 2 hrs ago Trump appeasing Putin with pressure on Ukraine, Biden tells BBC In his first interview since leaving office, the 82-year-old criticises his successor's handling of the war and is challenged on his own record. 2 hrs ago World 2 hrs ago Watch: Biden's first interview since leaving the White House Former US President Joe Biden talks Trump, Russia and US-Europe relations with the BBC's Today programme. 2 hrs ago US & Canada 2 days ago Trump's former VP Mike Pence receives JFK Courage Award Pence defied calls by Donald Trump to overturn the result of the 2020 election, and was shunned by Republicans as a result. 2 days ago US & Canada 25 Apr 2025 What would it mean for Ukraine to temporarily give up land? As Ukraine reckons with the terms of a possible peace deal, BBC Verify asks what it could mean in practice. 25 Apr 2025 BBC Verify British Broadcasting Corporation Home News Sport Business Innovation Culture Arts Travel Earth Audio Video Live Weather BBC Shop BritBox BBC in other languages Follow BBC on: Terms of Use About the BBC Privacy Policy Cookies Accessibility Help Contact the BBC Advertise with us Do not share or sell my info Contact technical support Copyright 2025 BBC. All rights reserved. The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites. Read about our approach to external linking.Hunter Biden: What was he doing in China and Ukraine? Skip to content British Broadcasting Corporation Home News Sport Business Innovation Culture Arts Travel Earth Audio Video Live Home News Israel-Gaza War War in Ukraine US & Canada UK UK Politics England N. Ireland N. Ireland Politics Scotland Scotland Politics Wales Wales Politics Africa Asia China India Australia Europe Latin America Middle East In Pictures BBC InDepth BBC Verify Sport Business Executive Lounge Technology of Business Future of Business Innovation Technology Science & Health Artificial Intelligence AI v the Mind Culture Film & TV Music Art & Design Style Books Entertainment News Arts Arts in Motion Travel Destinations Africa Antarctica Asia Australia and Pacific Caribbean & Bermuda Central America Europe Middle East North America South America World’s Table Culture & Experiences Adventures The SpeciaList Earth Natural Wonders Weather & Science Climate Solutions Sustainable Business Green Living Audio Podcasts Radio Audio FAQs Video Live Live News Live Sport Home News Sport Business Innovation Culture Arts Travel Earth Audio Video Live Weather Newsletters Hunter Biden: What was he doing in China and Ukraine? 6 April 2021 Share Save Share Save Getty Images Vice-President Biden in 2016 with his son Hunter looking on Hunter Biden, second son of US President Joe Biden, is being investigated by the Justice Department over his finances including, according to US media reports, some of his business dealings in China. During the 2020 election campaign, he and his father were frequently accused by Donald Trump and his associates of wrongdoing in regards to China and Ukraine, allegations which they both denied. The New York Post reported on an alleged email in which an adviser from a Ukrainian energy company, Burisma, apparently thanked Hunter for inviting him to meet his father, Joe Biden. Asked about the allegations, Joe Biden told a reporter it was a "smear campaign". No criminal activity has been proven, and no evidence has emerged that Mr Biden did anything to intentionally benefit his son. In an interview with the BBC months after his father was sworn in as president, Hunter Biden defended his qualifications for the position at Burisma but added that, in retrospect, he had "missed... the perception that I would create". Claims of influence-peddling are common in Washington DC and Mr Trump's children have also been accused of conflicts of interest in lucrative business deals overseas. They, too, deny wrongdoing. What do we know about the federal investigation? The Justice Department is investigating Hunter Biden's finances including scrutinising some of his past Chinese business dealings and other transactions, a "person familiar with the matter" told The Associated Press in December . The tax investigation was launched in 2018 but Hunter Biden said he had learned about it for the first time in December 2020. Asked about the investigation by US broadcaster CBS this April, the president's son said: "I'm co-operating, completely. And I'm absolutely certain, 100% certain, that at the end of the investigation, that I will be cleared of any wrongdoing." What have the Bidens been accused of in China? The New York Post cited a purported email from Hunter Biden in August 2017 indicating he was receiving a $10m annual fee from a Chinese billionaire for "introductions alone", though it is unclear who was involved in the alleged introductions. Another purported email, which Fox News said it had confirmed, reportedly refers to a deal pursued by Hunter involving China's largest private energy firm. It is said to include a cryptic mention of "10 held by H for the big guy". Fox News cited unnamed sources as saying "the big guy" in the purported email was a reference to Joe Biden. This message is said to be from May 2017. Both emails would date from when the former US vice-president was a private citizen. A former business associate of Hunter Biden has come forward to say he can confirm the allegations. Tony Bobulinski told Fox News that, contrary to Joe Biden's statements that he had nothing to do with his son's business affairs, Hunter had "frequently referenced asking him for his sign-off or advice on various potential deals" in China. Mr Bobulinski, who is reportedly a US Navy veteran, separately told Fox News' Tucker Carlson that he had met on two occasions with Joe Biden to discuss business deals with China, the first time in May 2017 when Barack Obama's former vice-president was a private citizen. He says he asked Joe Biden's brother, James, whether the family was concerned about possible scrutiny of the former vice-president's involvement in a potential business deal with a Chinese entity. Mr Bobulinski told Fox News that James Biden had replied: "Plausible deniability." Mr Bobulinski was invited by Mr Trump to be his guest at the final presidential debate in Nashville, Tennessee on 22 October. What is known about Hunter's dealings in China? In 2013, Hunter flew aboard Air Force Two with his father, who was then vice-president, on an official visit to Beijing, where the younger Biden met investment banker Jonathan Li. Hunter told the New Yorker he had just met Mr Li for "a cup of coffee", but 12 days after the trip a private equity fund, BHR Partners, was approved by the Chinese authorities. Mr Li was chief executive and Hunter was a board member. He would hold a 10% stake. Getty Images Joe Biden walks out of Air Force Two with his granddaughter and son, Hunter Biden BHR is backed by some of China's largest state banks and by local governments, according to US media. Hunter Biden's lawyer said he had joined the board in an unpaid position "based on his interest in seeking ways to bring Chinese capital to international markets". His lawyer also said his client did not acquire his financial stake in BHR until 2017, after his father had left office in the US. Hunter resigned from the board of BHR in April 2020, but still held his 10% stake in BHR as of July this year, according to the company report. What did the New York Post say about Hunter Biden and Ukraine? The New York Post reported an email from April 2015, in which an adviser to Burisma, Vadym Pozharskyi, apparently thanked Hunter Biden for inviting him to meet his father in Washington. Hunter was a director on the board of Burisma - a Ukrainian-owned private energy company while his father was the Obama administration's pointman on US-Ukrainian relations. Hunter was one of several foreigners on its board. The New York Post article did not provide evidence that the meeting had ever taken place. The Biden election campaign said there was no record of any such meeting on the former vice-president's "official schedule" from the time. But in a statement to Politico , the campaign also acknowledged that Mr Biden could have had an "informal interaction" with the Burisma adviser that did not appear on his official schedule, though it said any such encounter would have been "cursory". "Investigations by the press, during impeachment, and even by two Republican-led Senate committees whose work was decried as 'not legitimate' and political by a GOP colleague, have all reached the same conclusion: that Joe Biden carried out official US policy toward Ukraine and engaged in no wrongdoing," said Andrew Bates, a spokesman for Mr Biden. What we know about Biden-Ukraine corruption claims Mr Biden's team has also decried the New York Post story as "Russian disinformation", though it did not say the emails were bogus. The New York Post article was shared by President Trump and his allies. Two of his former advisers, Steve Bannon and Rudy Giuliani, were involved in providing the story and the hard drive containing the alleged emails, to the newspaper. Mr Giuliani says the messages were found on a laptop that Hunter dropped off at a Delaware repair shop in April 2019. Sceptics have noted that Mr Giuliani travelled in December 2019 to Kyiv where he met Ukrainian lawmaker Andriy Derkach, whom the US Treasury has designated as a longtime Kremlin agent. Mr Giuliani has acknowledged trying dig up dirt on the Bidens in Ukraine. But the US Director of National Intelligence, John Ratcliffe, told Fox Business that the purported emails were not connected to a Russian disinformation effort. Other US media say they have been unable to verify the authenticity of the emails. Hunter has neither confirmed nor denied that he dropped off a laptop at the location. Hunter joined Burisma in 2014, and remained on the board until April 2019, when he decided to leave. Speaking to the BBC, he said Burisma had seen his name "as gold" and that it had played a large part in his appointment to the board. Twitter and Facebook's action over Joe Biden article reignites bias claims What are the Bidens accused of in Ukraine? Donald Trump and his allies accused Joe Biden of wrongdoing because he had pushed, while vice-president, for the Ukrainian government to fire its top prosecutor, who was investigating the company for which Hunter worked. In 2016, Joe Biden called for the dismissal of Ukrainian prosecutor Viktor Shokin, whose office had Burisma and other companies under investigation. However, other Western leaders and major bodies that give financial support to Ukraine also wanted the prosecutor dismissed because they believed he was not active enough in tackling corruption. What else has the Biden campaign said? Shortly before the final presidential debate last year, the Democrat's camp released a statement denying wrongdoing. "Joe Biden has never even considered being involved in business with his family, nor in any overseas business whatsoever," said the statement. "He has never held stock in any such business arrangements nor has any family member or any other person ever held stock for him. "What is true is that Tony Bobulinski admitted on the record to Breitbart that he is angry that he was *not* able to go into business with Hunter and James Biden [Joe Biden's brother]." What did this have to do with impeachment? In 2019, details emerged of a phone call Mr Trump, the then president, had made to the president of Ukraine, in which he had urged the Ukrainian leader to investigate the Bidens. President Trump's impeachment explained This led to charges by the Democrats that Mr Trump was trying to illegally pressure Ukraine to help damage his election rival, resulting in impeachment by the House of Representatives. Mr Trump denied he had done anything wrong, and he was later acquitted by the Republican-controlled US Senate. Getty Images President Trump holds a copy of The Washington Post the day after the US Senate acquitted him on two articles of impeachment Has anything been proven against the Bidens? While no criminal activity has been proven, it has raised questions about potential conflicts of interest. A senior State Department official raised such concerns as far back as 2015. Joe Biden's son defends foreign dealings US Republican lawmakers launched an investigation and found last year that Hunter's work for the Ukrainian firm had been "problematic" - but there wasn't evidence that US foreign policy was influenced by it. No criminal charges were proven against Burisma either. The company issued a statement in 2017 saying "all legal proceedings and pending criminal allegations" against it were closed. Last year, Yuriy Lutsenko, the prosecutor in Ukraine who succeeded Viktor Shokin, told the BBC that there was no reason to investigate the Bidens under Ukrainian law. There is nothing illegal about sitting on a board of a company whilst family members serve in government. Hunter Biden's lawyers said in statement in October 2019 that he had undertaken "these business activities independently. He did not believe it appropriate to discuss them with his father, nor did he." Hunter told the New Yorker magazine that on the only occasion he had mentioned Burisma: "Dad said, 'I hope you know what you are doing.'" Amid all the scrutiny, Joe Biden promised last year that if he was elected president, no-one in his family would hold a job or have a business relationship with a foreign corporation or foreign government. Impeachment of Donald Trump US election 2020 BBC Verify Hunter Biden Joe Biden Related Jeremy Bowen: Trump-Zelensky row signals looming crisis between Europe and US 1 Mar 2025 World 'The boss' featured at Trump hush-money trial 25 Apr 2024 US & Canada How did US impeachments go from rare to routine? 28 Sep 2023 US & Canada More 1 hr ago Joe Biden on Trump: 'What president ever talks like that? That's not who we are' Exclusive: The former president tells Nick Robinson his verdict on his successor's first 100 days and his "grave concern" for the future of the Atlantic Alliance 1 hr ago BBC InDepth 1 hr ago Trump appeasing Putin with pressure on Ukraine, Biden tells BBC In his first interview since leaving office, the 82-year-old criticises his successor's handling of the war and is challenged on his own record. 1 hr ago World 1 hr ago Watch: Biden's first interview since leaving the White House Former US President Joe Biden talks Trump, Russia and US-Europe relations with the BBC's Today programme. 1 hr ago US & Canada 2 days ago Trump's former VP Mike Pence receives JFK Courage Award Pence defied calls by Donald Trump to overturn the result of the 2020 election, and was shunned by Republicans as a result. 2 days ago US & Canada 25 Apr 2025 What would it mean for Ukraine to temporarily give up land? As Ukraine reckons with the terms of a possible peace deal, BBC Verify asks what it could mean in practice. 25 Apr 2025 BBC Verify British Broadcasting Corporation Home News Sport Business Innovation Culture Arts Travel Earth Audio Video Live Weather BBC Shop BritBox BBC in other languages Follow BBC on: Terms of Use About the BBC Privacy Policy Cookies Accessibility Help Contact the BBC Advertise with us Do not share or sell my info Contact technical support Copyright 2025 BBC. All rights reserved. The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites. Read about our approach to external linking.The Bidens’ Influence Peddling Timeline - United States House Committee on Oversight and Accountability Skip to main content Toggle navigation Search About Chairman James Comer Full Committee Rules Committee Activity Calendar Hearings Letters Markups Reports Forums Subcommittees Cybersecurity, Information Technology, and Government Innovation Economic Growth, Energy Policy, and Regulatory Affairs Government Operations Health Care and Financial Services Military and Foreign Affairs Federal Law Enforcement Delivering on Government Efficiency Task Force on the Declassification of Federal Secrets Media Center Press Releases The Overview Biden Family Investigation The Bidens’ Influence Peddling Timeline Biden's Border Crisis COVID Origins Blow the Whistle The Bidens’ Influence Peddling Timeline Since taking the gavel in January, the Committee on Oversight and Accountability has accelerated its investigation of the Biden family’s domestic and international business practices to determine whether the Biden family has been targeted by foreign actors, President Biden is compromised, and our national security is threatened. Records obtained through the Committee’s subpoenas to date reveal that the Bidens and their associates have received over $20 million in payments from foreign entities. Below is a timeline that details key dates in our investigation. The main points of interest are: 1) Romania: On September 28, 2015, Vice President Biden welcomed Romanian President Klaus Iohannis to the White House. Within five weeks of this meeting, a Romanian businessman involved with a high-profile corruption prosecution in Romania, Gabriel Popoviciu, began depositing a Biden associate’s bank account, which ultimately made their way into Biden family accounts. Popoviciu made sixteen of the seventeen payments, totaling over $3 million, to the Biden associate account while Joe Biden was Vice President. Biden family accounts ultimately received approximately $1.038 million. The total amount from Romania to the Biden family and their associates is over $3 million. 2) China- CEFC: On March 1, 2017—less than two months after Vice President Joe Biden left public office—State Energy HK Limited, a Chinese company, wired $3 million to a Biden associate’s account. This is the same bank account used in the above “Romania” section. After the Chinese company wired the Biden associate account the $3 million, the Biden family received approximately $1,065,692 over a three-month period in different bank accounts. Additionally, the CEFC Chairman gives Hunter Biden a diamond worth $80,000. Lastly, CEFC creates a joint venture with the Bidens in the summer of 2017. The timeline lays out the “WhatsApp” messages and subsequent wires from the Chinese to the Bidens of $100,000 and $5 million. The total amount from China, specifically with CEFC and their related entities, to the Biden family and their associates is over $8 million. 3) Kazakhstan: On April 22, 2014, Kenes Rakishev, a Kazakhstani oligarch used his Singaporean entity, Novatus Holdings, to wire one of Hunter Biden’s Rosemont Seneca entities $142,300. The very next day—April 23, 2014—the Rosemont Seneca entity transferred the exact same amount of money to a car dealership for a car for Hunter Biden. Hunter Biden and Devon Archer would represent Burisma in Kazakhstan in May/June of 2014 as the company attempted to broker a three-way deal among Burisma, the Kazakhstan government, and a Chinese state-owned energy company. 4) Ukraine: Devon Archer joined the Burisma board of directors in spring of 2014 and was joined by Hunter Biden shortly thereafter. Hunter Biden joined the company as counsel, but after a meeting with Burisma owner Mykola Zlochevsky in Lake Como, Italy, was elevated to the board of directors in the spring of 2014. Both Biden and Archer were each paid $1 million per year for their positions on the board of directors. In December 2015, after a Burisma board of directors meeting, Zlochevsky and Hunter Biden “called D.C.” in the wake of mounting pressures the company was facing. Zlochevsky was later charged with bribing Ukrainian officials with $6 million in an attempt to delay or drop the investigation into his company. The total amount from Ukraine to the Biden family and their associates is $6.5 million. 5) Russia: On February 14, 2014, a Russian oligarch and Russia’s richest woman, Yelena Baturina, wired a Rosemont Seneca entity $3.5 million. On March 11, 2014, the wire was split up: $750,000 was transferred to Devon Archer, and the remainder was sent to Rosemont Seneca Bohai, a company Devon Archer and Hunter Biden split equally. In spring of 2014, Yelena Baturina joined Hunter Biden and Devon Archer to share a meal with then-Vice President Biden at a restaurant in Washington, D.C. The total amount from Russia to the Biden family and their associates is $3.5 million. Beyond this timeline, here are links to our First , Second , Third , and Fourth Bank Memorandums that provide detailed descriptions and show actual bank records and wires. Biden Family Timeline China – BHR China- CEFC Hunter Biden Criminal Investigation Kazakhstan Romania Russia Ukraine 2009 January 20, 2009 Important Date Obama-Biden Administration begins. 2013 November 1, 2013 China – BHR Hunter Biden, business associate, and Chinese investors agree to create Bohai Harvest RST Equity Investment Fund Management Co., Ltd. (BHR), an investment fund controlled by the Bank of China, to focus on mergers and acquisitions, and investment in and reforms of state-owned enterprise. December 4, 2013 China – BHR Vice President Biden travels with Hunter Biden on Air Force 2 to China and meets CEO of BHR, Jonathan Li. Shortly thereafter, BHR’s business license was approved and Hunter Biden was a board member. 2014 February 5, 2014 Kazakhstan Hunter Biden met Kazakhstani oligarch Kenes Rakishev at the Hay Adams Hotel in Washington, D.C. In email correspondences with Devon Archer surrounding the meeting, Rakishev requested Secretary of State John Kerry visit Kazakhstan. Archer replied, “if we have some business started as planned I will ensure its planned soonest.” Rakishev is a Kazakhstani oligarch and millionaire and was a director at Kazakhstan’s state-owned oil company KazMunayGas. Rakishev maintained close ties to Karim Massimov, who became prime minister on April 2, 2014. February 14, 2014 Russia Russian oligarch Yelena Baturina – the wealthiest woman in Russia and then married to the former mayor of Moscow—wired the Rosemont Seneca Thornton bank account $3.5 million. Rosemont Seneca Thornton’s beneficiary was Rosemont Seneca Partners, of which Hunter Biden was the chairman. March 11, 2014 Russia Rosemont Seneca Thornton transferred $2,752,711 to a Rosemont Seneca Bohai bank account. Also on March 11, 2014, $750,000 of the original wire from Baturina was sent to Devon Archer from Rosemont Seneca Thornton. Rosemont Seneca Bohai was an entity used by both Hunter Biden and Devon Archer. In his testimony to the Committee, Archer confirmed that he and Hunter Biden were 50-50 owners in Rosemont Seneca Bohai. Rosemont Seneca Bohai was opened in Delaware on February 13, 2014—the day before the $3.5 million wire from Yelena Baturina. The bank records can be found in the third bank records memo. April 1, 2014 Russia and Kazakhstan In the spring of 2014, after Yelena Baturina sent the $3.5 million wire to Rosemont Seneca Thornton and around the same time that Kenes Rakishev wired money to Rosemont Seneca Bohai for Hunter Biden’s sportscar, Vice President Biden attended dinner with Yelena Baturina, Kenes Rakishev, Karim Massimov, Hunter Biden, Devon Archer, and others at Café Milano in Washington, D.C. Joe Biden stayed for dinner. Devon Archer provided this information during his transcribed interview . April 15, 2014 Ukraine Burisma, a Ukrainian energy company, appoints Biden business associate to their board of directors. April 22, 2014 Kazakhstan Kenes Rakishev’s Singaporean company wires $142,300 through his Latvian company to a Rosemont entity. The details can be found in the third bank records memorandum . April 22, 2014 Ukraine Vice President Biden travels to Ukraine and gives an anti-corruption speech. April 23, 2014 Kazakhstan The Rosemont entity wires $142,300 to a car dealership in New Jersey for a new sports car for Hunter Biden. The details can be found in the third bank records memorandum . May 12, 2014 Ukraine Burisma announces Hunter Biden joined its board of directors. May 21, 2014 Romania Vice President Biden visits Romania and delivers a speech to the Romanian Prime Minister, judges, prosecutors, and leaders of the Romanian Parliament. September 12, 2014 China – BHR BHR invests $1.7 billion in CCP-linked petroleum and chemical company. December 9, 2014 China – BHR Hunter Biden and business associate invest $484,920 into BHR. December 22, 2014 Kazakhstan Kenes Rakishev’s Kazakhstani oil company and Burisma join with a CCP-linked company and announce a transnational financial arrangement. 2015 April 16, 2015 Ukraine and Kazakhstan On April 16, 2015, Vice President Joe Biden attended a dinner with Karim Massimov, Vadym Pozharsky, Hunter Biden, Devon Archer, and others at Café Milano in Washington, D.C. Devon Archer provided this information during his transcribed interview . September 15, 2015 China – BHR BHR joins with a CCP-linked entity to acquire US-based Henniges Automotive in a deal reportedly worth $600 million. September 28, 2015 Romania Vice President Biden welcomes Romanian President Klaus Iohannis to the White House. A readout of the meeting states, the “Vice President welcomed President Iohannis’ focus on anti-corruption efforts and rule of law as a means to strengthen national security and promote greater investment and economic growth.” President Iohannis said the Vice President “voiced satisfaction over Romania’s progress with the fight against corruption.” November 2, 2015 Ukraine Vadym Pozharskyi suggests high level U.S. level officials come to Ukraine and talk with Prosecutor General Viktor Shokin and President Petro Poroshenko about Mykola Zlochevsky’s investigations. Prosecutor General Shokin was investigating Burisma and Burisma’s owner, Zlochevsky for fraud. Prosecutor General Shokin is the Ukranian government official Vice President Biden demanded Poroshenko fire. November 5, 2015 Romania Romanian businessman, Gabriel Popoviciu, begins making deposits into Robinson Walker, LLC’s bank account. Robinson Walker, LLC is an entity owned by a Biden associate, Rob Walker. Popoviciu’s company sent Robinson Walker the first wire for $179,836.86. From November 2015 to May 2017, Popoviciu’s company paid Robinson Walker, LLC over $3 million. Biden family accounts received approximately $1.038 million from the Robinson Walker, LLC account after Popoviciu’s deposits. Sixteen of the seventeen payments from Popoviciu’s company to Robinson Walker, LLC were made while Joe Biden was Vice President. Details can be found in the Second Bank Records Memorandum . November 6, 2015 Ukraine Amos Hochstein, a high level U.S. government offical working in the Obama-Biden Administration, meets with Hunter Biden and discusses Burisma. November 9, 2015 Romania Rob Walker’s account wires Hunter Biden $59,900. Details can be found in the Second Bank Records Memorandum. November 11, 2015 Ukraine Amos Hochstein meets with Vice President Biden in the West Wing. November 12, 2015 Ukraine Amos Hochstein calls Hunter Biden. November 13, 2015 Romania Hunter Biden meets with the U.S. Ambassador to Romania. November 13, 2015 Ukraine VP Biden touched down in Ukraine last night. Read his initial notes from the road: https://t.co/FdPysDjiqT pic.twitter.com/ybZFp7frYe — VP Biden (Archived) (@VP44) December 7, 2015 Vice President Biden announces trip to Ukraine to take place the first week of December 2015. November 14, 2015 Ukraine Vadym Pozharskyi emails Hunter Biden confirmation that the Vice President will be traveling to Ukraine. November 14, 2015 Romania Hunter Biden meets with the Ambassador of Romania to the United States. November 15, 2015 Romania Hunter Biden travels to Romania. December 4, 2015 Ukraine Mykola Zlochevsky and Vadym Pozharsky complain about constant “government pressures” and urge Hunter Biden to call the Vice President of the United States, Joe Biden. Devon Archer testified that Hunter Biden, Zlochevsky, and Pozharsky “called D.C.” Devon Archer provided this information during his transcribed interview . December 7, 2015 China – CEFC Hunter Biden and CEFC Chairman Ye Jianming begin communicating regarding a possible U.S. partnership. December 7, 2015 Romania Robinson Walker, LLC wires Hunter Biden $59,725. Details can be found in the Second Bank Records Memorandum. December 7, 2015 Ukraine https://oversight.house.gov/wp-content/uploads/2023/07/Biden-Firing-Ukraine-Prosecutor-Clip.mp4 Vice President Biden arrives in Ukraine, where he demands Prosecutor General Shokin be fired if Ukraine wants $1 billion in International Monetary Fund (IMF) loans. December 9, 2015 Ukraine Vice President Biden departs Ukraine and gets a commitment from President Poroshenko that Prosecutor General Shokin will be fired. December 17, 2015 Ukraine Vice President Biden hosts a holiday party at the Vice Presidential residence, which Amos Hochstein and Hunter Biden both attend. December 23, 2015 Romania Robinson Walker, LLC wires Hunter Biden $60,091.24. Details can be found in the Second Bank Records Memorandum . 2016 January 20, 2016 Ukraine Vice President Biden meets with President Poroshenko in Switzerland at the World Economic Forum where Biden reinforced the linkage between the loan guarantee and the necessary reforms. February 4, 2016 Ukraine Mykola Zlochevsky gives Hunter Biden unspecified, extravagant birthday gifts. February 11, 2016 Ukraine Vice President Biden and President Poroshenko conduct a call. February 12, 2016 Romania Robinson Walker, LLC wires Hunter Biden’s Owasco P.C. $61,126.24. Details can be found in the Second Bank Records Memorandum. February 16, 2016 Ukraine President Poroshenko asks Prosecutor General Shokin to resign. February 18, 2016 Ukraine Vice President Biden calls President Poroshenko to thank him for calling on Prosecutor General Shokin to resign. February 19, 2016 Ukraine President Poroshenko says he recieved Prosecutor General Shokin’s letter of resignation. March 24, 2016 Romania Robinson Walker, LLC wires Owasco P.C. $61,816.05. Details can be found in the Second Bank Records Memorandum. March 29, 2016 Romania Hunter Biden meets again with U.S. Ambassador to Romania. March 29, 2016 Ukraine Ukranian Parliament approves President Poroshenko’s firing of Prosecutor General Shokin. May 23, 2016 Romania Robinson Walker, LLC wires Owasco P.C. $123,830.80. Details can be found in the Second Bank Records Memorandum. May 23, 2016 Romania Robinson Walker, LLC wires Owasco P.C. $53,419.74. Details can be found in the Second Bank Records Memorandum. July 11, 2016 Romania Robinson Walker, LLC wires Owasco P.C. $116,860.93. Details can be found in the Second Bank Records Memorandum. Load More Share via Email About Chairman James Comer Full Committee Rules Committee Activity Calendar Hearings Letters Markups Reports Forums Subcommittees Cybersecurity, Information Technology, and Government Innovation Economic Growth, Energy Policy, and Regulatory Affairs Government Operations Health Care and Financial Services Military and Foreign Affairs Federal Law Enforcement Delivering on Government Efficiency Task Force on the Declassification of Federal Secrets Media Center Press Releases The Overview Biden Family Investigation The Bidens’ Influence Peddling Timeline Biden's Border Crisis COVID Origins Blow the Whistle Minority © 2025 Committee on Oversight and Government Reform Privacy Policy 2157 Rayburn House Office Building Washington, DC 20515 Phone: (202) 225-5074 Fax: (202) 225-3974 Search About Chairman James Comer Full Committee Rules Committee Activity Calendar Hearings Letters Markups Reports Forums Subcommittees Cybersecurity, Information Technology, and Government Innovation Economic Growth, Energy Policy, and Regulatory Affairs Government Operations Health Care and Financial Services Military and Foreign Affairs Federal Law Enforcement Delivering on Government Efficiency Task Force on the Declassification of Federal Secrets Media Center Press Releases The Overview Biden Family Investigation The Bidens’ Influence Peddling Timeline Biden's Border Crisis COVID Origins Blow the WhistlePresident Donald J. Trump Achieved the Biggest Tax Cuts and Reforms in American History – The White House Skip to content This is historical material “frozen in time”. The website is no longer updated and links to external websites and some internal pages may not work. Open Menu WhiteHouse.gov WhiteHouse.gov Copy URL to your clipboard Share Economy National Security Budget Immigration Energy Search WhiteHouse.gov Open Search Fact Sheets President Donald J. Trump Achieved the Biggest Tax Cuts and Reforms in American History Budget & Spending Issued on: February 5, 2018 Share: Share on Facebook Share on Twitter Copy URL to your clipboard All News Quote And just as I promised the American people from this podium 11 months ago, we enacted the biggest tax cuts and reforms in American history. Our massive tax cuts provide tremendous relief for the middle class and small business. President Donald J. Trump BIGGEST TAX CUTS AND REFORMS: Because of President Donald J. Trump, Americans will benefit from the biggest tax cuts and reforms in American history. President Trump’s tax cuts are the biggest gross tax cuts in American history, cutting over $5.5 trillion in taxes over ten years. The President’s tax law included substantial reforms to make taxes simpler and fairer, which helped offset the cost of the tax cuts and thereby limit the net tax cut to $1.5 trillion. President Trump cut the corporate tax rate from 35 percent to 21 percent, the largest percentage point reduction of the top marginal rate in history. President Trump’s tax cuts include the biggest increase in the child tax credit in history. The Child Tax Credit was increased by $573.4 billion over ten years, larger than any previous change to credits specifically targeting families. President Trump’s tax cuts included some of the most substantial reforms to the tax code in American history. The Tax Cuts and Jobs Act will help end the offshoring of corporate money by transitioning the country to a territorial system of corporate taxation and creating anti-abuse rules for multinationals that artificially shift profits offshore. The Tax Cuts and Jobs Act nearly doubles the standard deduction, to simplify tax filing. The Tax Cuts and Jobs Act limits itemized deductions, while maintaining the most popular deductions, such as the mortgage interest deduction and charitable giving deduction. The Tax Cuts and Jobs Act facilitates school choice by allowing families to use 529 college savings plans for elementary and secondary education expense and spend up to $10,000 annually on private school tuition and related expenses, in addition to the uses previously allowed. The first new community development tax incentive program enacted since the Clinton administration, providing an opportunity for mainstream private investors to support businesses and distressed communities with the creation of Opportunity Zones. The Tax Cuts and Jobs Act repeals the individual mandate, marking the single largest legislative blow to Obamacare since the law was passed. This individual mandate is particularly painful for low and middle-income Americans: 79 percent of people who paid the penalty in 2016 had household income below $50,000. The tax law’s repeal of the individual mandate relieves Americans from the unprecedented assault on liberty, where the Federal Government fined Americans for not purchasing something. As a combination of tax cuts and tax reform, the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act was therefore the biggest legislative action reforming our tax code in history. AMERICAN COMPANIES ARE DELIVERING: Businesses throughout the country are responding to President Trump’s tax cuts by rewarding American workers. Since President Trump provided his historic tax cuts and reforms, more than 3.5 million American workers across more than 300 companies have received bonuses, raises, and increased. Many companies have also announced new investments and new hiring. Best Buy has announced it is giving a $1,000 bonus to full-time employees and a $500 bonus to part-time employees, in addition to investing $20 million to expand technology development centers across the United States. Quest Diagnostics is giving a bonus of up to $500 to nearly 40,000 employees and investing $75 million of its tax savings back into the company and employees. Discover announced it would raise its minimum wage to $15.25 an hour and had paid a $1,000 bonus to more than 15,000 non-executive employees. Hostess Brands is providing employees with a $750 cash bonus and $500 contribution to their 401(k) accounts, in addition to providing a year’s worth of free Hostess products. Cigna announced that it was increasing its minimum wage in the United States to $16 an hour and adding $30 million to its 401(k) program to match additional contributions, benefitting more than 30,000 employees. Lowe’s announced it was giving a bonus of up to $1,000 to employees and expanding its benefits package for full-time workers to include 10 weeks of maternity leave, two weeks of parental leave, and adoption assistance. BUILDING ON OUR ECONOMIC MOMENTUM: President Trump’s tax cuts are expanding on a strong economy that continues to benefit American workers. Average hourly wages increased by 2.9 percent last year, the largest increase in 8 years. 200,000 jobs were added in January, while the unemployment rate remained at its lowest level in 17 years, 4.1 percent. Manufacturing expanded in January at near the fastest pace since 2004, according to the Institute for Supply Management data. Recent polling shows Americans are satisfied with the state of the U.S. economy, with the percentage of those polled with positive views of the economy at a 17-year high. Consumer optimism increased in January according to The Conference Board’s Consumer Confidence Survey. Consumers are confident that the strong pace of growth seen in late 2017 will continue in 2018. According to the UBS Investor Watch Quarterly, which surveys business owner sentiment, optimism has soared since the passage of tax reform. UBS found that positive economic outlook among business owners has grown by 18 percentage points between quarter four of 2017 and quarter one of 2018. UBS found that 79 percent of the businesses owners surveyed were satisfied with the tax bill and 72 percent believed it would boost the economy. WhiteHouse.gov The White House Twitter Facebook Instagram YouTube President Donald J. Trump Vice President Mike Pence First Lady Melania Trump Mrs. Karen Pence The Cabinet Administration Accomplishments News Remarks Articles Presidential Actions Briefings & Statements About The White House Economy & Jobs Budget & Spending Education Immigration National Security & Defense Healthcare Council of Economic Advisers Council of Environmental Quality National Security Council Office of Management and Budget Office of National Drug Control Policy Office of Science and Technology Policy Copyright Privacy Policy Menu News Remarks Briefings & Statements Presidential Actions Articles All News Issues Education National Security & Defense Budget & Spending Immigration Healthcare All Issues The Administration President Donald J. Trump Vice President Michael R. Pence First Lady Melania Trump Second Lady Karen Pence The Cabinet Disclosures Executive Offices Council of Economic Advisers Council on Environmental Quality National Security Council Office of Management and Budget Office of National Drug Control Policy Office of Science and Technology Policy About The White House White House Tours Past Presidents Past First Ladies The Grounds Our Government Get Involved Write or Call the White House White House Internship Program White House Fellows Contact Live Search Type Your Search Press enter to searchPresident Donald J. Trump Achieved the Biggest Tax Cuts and Reforms in American History – The White House Skip to content This is historical material “frozen in time”. The website is no longer updated and links to external websites and some internal pages may not work. Open Menu WhiteHouse.gov WhiteHouse.gov Copy URL to your clipboard Share Economy National Security Budget Immigration Energy Search WhiteHouse.gov Open Search Fact Sheets President Donald J. Trump Achieved the Biggest Tax Cuts and Reforms in American History Budget & Spending Issued on: February 5, 2018 Share: Share on Facebook Share on Twitter Copy URL to your clipboard All News Quote And just as I promised the American people from this podium 11 months ago, we enacted the biggest tax cuts and reforms in American history. Our massive tax cuts provide tremendous relief for the middle class and small business. President Donald J. Trump BIGGEST TAX CUTS AND REFORMS: Because of President Donald J. Trump, Americans will benefit from the biggest tax cuts and reforms in American history. President Trump’s tax cuts are the biggest gross tax cuts in American history, cutting over $5.5 trillion in taxes over ten years. The President’s tax law included substantial reforms to make taxes simpler and fairer, which helped offset the cost of the tax cuts and thereby limit the net tax cut to $1.5 trillion. President Trump cut the corporate tax rate from 35 percent to 21 percent, the largest percentage point reduction of the top marginal rate in history. President Trump’s tax cuts include the biggest increase in the child tax credit in history. The Child Tax Credit was increased by $573.4 billion over ten years, larger than any previous change to credits specifically targeting families. President Trump’s tax cuts included some of the most substantial reforms to the tax code in American history. The Tax Cuts and Jobs Act will help end the offshoring of corporate money by transitioning the country to a territorial system of corporate taxation and creating anti-abuse rules for multinationals that artificially shift profits offshore. The Tax Cuts and Jobs Act nearly doubles the standard deduction, to simplify tax filing. The Tax Cuts and Jobs Act limits itemized deductions, while maintaining the most popular deductions, such as the mortgage interest deduction and charitable giving deduction. The Tax Cuts and Jobs Act facilitates school choice by allowing families to use 529 college savings plans for elementary and secondary education expense and spend up to $10,000 annually on private school tuition and related expenses, in addition to the uses previously allowed. The first new community development tax incentive program enacted since the Clinton administration, providing an opportunity for mainstream private investors to support businesses and distressed communities with the creation of Opportunity Zones. The Tax Cuts and Jobs Act repeals the individual mandate, marking the single largest legislative blow to Obamacare since the law was passed. This individual mandate is particularly painful for low and middle-income Americans: 79 percent of people who paid the penalty in 2016 had household income below $50,000. The tax law’s repeal of the individual mandate relieves Americans from the unprecedented assault on liberty, where the Federal Government fined Americans for not purchasing something. As a combination of tax cuts and tax reform, the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act was therefore the biggest legislative action reforming our tax code in history. AMERICAN COMPANIES ARE DELIVERING: Businesses throughout the country are responding to President Trump’s tax cuts by rewarding American workers. Since President Trump provided his historic tax cuts and reforms, more than 3.5 million American workers across more than 300 companies have received bonuses, raises, and increased. Many companies have also announced new investments and new hiring. Best Buy has announced it is giving a $1,000 bonus to full-time employees and a $500 bonus to part-time employees, in addition to investing $20 million to expand technology development centers across the United States. Quest Diagnostics is giving a bonus of up to $500 to nearly 40,000 employees and investing $75 million of its tax savings back into the company and employees. Discover announced it would raise its minimum wage to $15.25 an hour and had paid a $1,000 bonus to more than 15,000 non-executive employees. Hostess Brands is providing employees with a $750 cash bonus and $500 contribution to their 401(k) accounts, in addition to providing a year’s worth of free Hostess products. Cigna announced that it was increasing its minimum wage in the United States to $16 an hour and adding $30 million to its 401(k) program to match additional contributions, benefitting more than 30,000 employees. Lowe’s announced it was giving a bonus of up to $1,000 to employees and expanding its benefits package for full-time workers to include 10 weeks of maternity leave, two weeks of parental leave, and adoption assistance. BUILDING ON OUR ECONOMIC MOMENTUM: President Trump’s tax cuts are expanding on a strong economy that continues to benefit American workers. Average hourly wages increased by 2.9 percent last year, the largest increase in 8 years. 200,000 jobs were added in January, while the unemployment rate remained at its lowest level in 17 years, 4.1 percent. Manufacturing expanded in January at near the fastest pace since 2004, according to the Institute for Supply Management data. Recent polling shows Americans are satisfied with the state of the U.S. economy, with the percentage of those polled with positive views of the economy at a 17-year high. Consumer optimism increased in January according to The Conference Board’s Consumer Confidence Survey. Consumers are confident that the strong pace of growth seen in late 2017 will continue in 2018. According to the UBS Investor Watch Quarterly, which surveys business owner sentiment, optimism has soared since the passage of tax reform. UBS found that positive economic outlook among business owners has grown by 18 percentage points between quarter four of 2017 and quarter one of 2018. UBS found that 79 percent of the businesses owners surveyed were satisfied with the tax bill and 72 percent believed it would boost the economy. WhiteHouse.gov The White House Twitter Facebook Instagram YouTube President Donald J. Trump Vice President Mike Pence First Lady Melania Trump Mrs. Karen Pence The Cabinet Administration Accomplishments News Remarks Articles Presidential Actions Briefings & Statements About The White House Economy & Jobs Budget & Spending Education Immigration National Security & Defense Healthcare Council of Economic Advisers Council of Environmental Quality National Security Council Office of Management and Budget Office of National Drug Control Policy Office of Science and Technology Policy Copyright Privacy Policy Menu News Remarks Briefings & Statements Presidential Actions Articles All News Issues Education National Security & Defense Budget & Spending Immigration Healthcare All Issues The Administration President Donald J. Trump Vice President Michael R. Pence First Lady Melania Trump Second Lady Karen Pence The Cabinet Disclosures Executive Offices Council of Economic Advisers Council on Environmental Quality National Security Council Office of Management and Budget Office of National Drug Control Policy Office of Science and Technology Policy About The White House White House Tours Past Presidents Past First Ladies The Grounds Our Government Get Involved Write or Call the White House White House Internship Program White House Fellows Contact Live Search Type Your Search Press enter to searchKenya’s ex-prime minister Odinga mangles his numbers on government revenue share in Nigeria - Africa Check Skip to main content English Français Main navigation Fact-checks Reports Factsheets Guides Spot Checks Blog Meta programme fact-checks Republish our work Who we are Our team Our impact How we are funded Partners Get in touch What we do Info Finder African Fact-Checking Awards Corrections Fact-checking research Training Media Literacy Educator knowledge hub How we fact-check Corrections policy Code of principles How we rate claims Get Involved Donate Submit a claim to fact-check Partner with us Join our team Fact-checking tips Quizzes Donate Back to Africa Check Kenya’s ex-prime minister Odinga mangles his numbers on government revenue share in Nigeria Published on 23 September 2020 Claim Three claims about how revenue is shared between Nigeria’s three levels of government. Verdict One correct, two incorrect Source Kenya’s former prime minister Raila Odinga (August 2020) This article is more than 4 years old Since 2004 Nigeria’s revenue sharing formula has given 52.68% to the federal government, 26.72% to states and 20.60% to local governments. Odinga was correct about local governments’ share, but wide of the mark for the other two government levels. And experts question his claim that Nigeria’s system “works perfectly well”. After months of an often fractious stalemate , in September 2020 Kenya’s senate hammered out a deal on how revenue would be shared between the country’s two levels of government. In August, at the height of the deadlock, former prime minister Odinga returned to a familiar talking point to argue for establishing a third tier of government. Building on this in an interview with Citizen TV , Odinga, who is also an African Union envoy , said Kenya could solve the recurring battle over how to share revenue if it looked to Nigeria for lessons. Nigeria, he said, had a local, state and federal system of government. “In terms of revenue share, 20% of the revenue goes to the local, 35% goes to the state and 45% goes to the federal governments ... and it works perfectly well,” Odinga said . We checked if he was on the mark about how revenue is shared in Africa’s largest economy . Claim In Nigeria … in terms of revenue share, 20% goes to the local government. Verdict correct We asked Dennis Onyango, Odinga’s spokesperson, for the source of the former leader’s claims. We will update this report with his response. In line with its constitution , Nigeria has a federal capital authority, 36 states and 768 local government authorities. There are also six area councils. The Revenue Mobilisation, Allocation and Fiscal Commission proposes a formula for how revenue is to be shared between the three levels. This is then approved by the national assembly . The revenue formula was first used in 1982 when the Nigeria Revenue Allocation Act came into effect. The law stipulated that 56% of funds would go to the federal government, 24% to states and 20% to local governments. The current formula can be traced to a March 2004 circular from the finance ministry. It has remained at these levels since. “The revenue allocation formula is still 52.68%, 26.72% and 20.6%,” Prof Sherifdeen Tella, professor of economics at Olabisi Onabanjo University told Africa Check. Before the revenue is split an amount “not less than 13%” is deducted and shared among the oil producing states based on their production levels. According to data from Nigeria's extractive industries transparency initiative , a government agency supervised by the president’s office, local governments get 20.6% of national revenue. We therefore rate Odinga as correct on this claim. Recent local government allocations at 20% The most recent full year data from the budget office shows that in 2019, local governments received N1.04 trillion of the N5.05 trillion available for sharing among the three levels of government. And in the first quarter of 2020, local governments got N441.44 billion of the N2.14 trillion available. Both these amounts work out to about 20% for local governments. (Note: Value-added tax is also shared among the three levels of government, using a different formula. Local governments get 35% of VAT revenue, state governments 50% and the federal government 15%.) Claim 35% of revenue goes to states. Verdict incorrect Data from Nigeria's extractive industries transparency initiative shows that 26.72% is reserved for the state governments, not the 35% Odinga claimed. We therefore rate this claim as incorrect. In 2019, of the N5.05 trillion available for sharing, states got N1.35 trillion. In the first quarter of 2020, states received N572.59 billion of the N2.14 trillion available. Both these allocations work out to 26.72%, in keeping with the formula. Claim 45% of revenue goes to the federal governments. Verdict incorrect Odinga’s claim of 45% is not accurate. Official data shows the federal government gets more than half of the total revenue. In 2019, data from the budget office shows the federal government received N2.66 trillion of the N5.05 trillion available for sharing. In the first quarter of 2020 it got N1.13 trillion out of N2.14 trillion. These amounts tally with the 52.68% set out in the sharing formula. Does Nigeria’s revenue sharing model work ‘perfectly well’? Raila Odinga’s assertion that the Nigerian revenue sharing formula “works perfectly” is contested. Gazie Okpara , a professor of marketing at Abia State University in southeast Nigeria whose interests include social policy, said the formula was imperfect because how the funds were spent was not transparent. “Each level of government should always give an account of how funds were spent,” he said, an audit that should be provided for in the constitution. Prof Sherifdeen Tella, a professor of economics at Olabisi Onabanjo University in southwestern Nigeria, told Africa Check that in his view, allocations to state and local governments, and especially the former, should be increased. “What is allocated to these two tiers of government is not sufficient.” Matthew Akintayo is a professor at the University of Ibadan , also in southwestern Nigeria. One of his focus areas is the economics of education. He told Africa Check that the sharing formula should be restructured. “A bulk or vast fraction of resources should be allocated to the state and local government because both arms of government are closer to the grassroots,” he said. He added that state governors should be given more leeway to manage their resources. John Kinuthia, a senior programme officer at the International Budget Partnership , told Africa Check that Odinga should also have considered the nature of devolved functions when drawing comparisons. It was difficult to compare Kenyan counties with Nigerian states, partly because they had different functions, Kinuthia said. He gave the example of education. “In Nigeria there are functions like education that are devolved, which is why you see a bigger proportion of resources at the subnational level compared to Kenya. In Kenya, education is still at the national level.” Republish our content for free We believe that everyone needs the facts. You can republish the text of this article free of charge, both online and in print. However, we ask that you pay attention to these simple guidelines . In a nutshell: 1. Do not include images, as in most cases we do not own the copyright. 2. Please do not edit the article. 3. Make sure you credit "Africa Check" in the byline and don't forget to mention that the article was originally published on africacheck.org . Name Surname Email Leave this field blank Vincent Ng’ethe in Nairobi and Motunrayo Joel in Lagos Claim Three claims about how revenue is shared between Nigeria’s three levels of government. Verdict One correct, two incorrect Source Kenya’s former prime minister Raila Odinga (August 2020) Join us on WhatsApp Further Reading false Nigeria Biafra Nnamdi Kanu arrest government No evidence Biafran pro-independence leader Nnamdi Kanu's wife and son arrested by Nigerian government scam Kenya government free online courses online scam No, Kenyan government not offering free online courses to all adults Kenya Economy William Ruto diaspora remittance revenue GDP #RutoRecordReport Precision or spin? Evaluating Kenyan president Ruto’s mid-term economic scorecard Add new comment Your name Comment About text formats Restricted HTML Allowed HTML tags: <a href hreflang> <em> <strong> <cite> <blockquote cite> <code> <ul type> <ol start type> <li> <dl> <dt> <dd> <h2 id> <h3 id> <h4 id> <h5 id> <h6 id> Lines and paragraphs break automatically. Web page addresses and email addresses turn into links automatically. limit: 600 characters Leave this field blank Sign up to our newsletter Name Africa Check values your trust and is committed to the responsible management, use and protection of personal information. See our privacy policy. Leave this field blank Spot Checks View All false Nigeria Biafra Nnamdi Kanu arrest government No evidence Biafran pro-independence leader Nnamdi Kanu's wife and son arrested by Nigerian government scam Kenya government free online courses online scam No, Kenyan government not offering free online courses to all adults Kenya Economy William Ruto diaspora remittance revenue GDP #RutoRecordReport Precision or spin? Evaluating Kenyan president Ruto’s mid-term economic scorecard We hold public figures accountable For democracy to function, public figures need to be held to account for what they say. The claims they make need to be checked, openly and impartially. Africa Check is an independent, non-partisan organisation which assesses claims made in the public arena using journalistic skills and evidence drawn from the latest online tools, readers, public sources and experts, sorting fact from fiction and publishing the results. Browse by category Health Covid-19 Education Crime Economy Kenya Nigeria Senegal South Africa Sign up to our newsletter Name Africa Check values your trust and is committed to the responsible management, use and protection of personal information. See our privacy policy. Leave this field blank Follow us Facebook Twitter Instagram TikTok Footer About Partner With Us Terms and Conditions Contact Us Sitemap Want to keep reading our fact-checks? We will never charge you for verified, reliable information. Help us keep it that way by supporting our work. Become a newsletter subscriber Name Africa Check values your trust and is committed to the responsible management, use and protection of personal information. See our privacy policy. Leave this field blank Support independent fact-checking in Africa. See our donation optionsKenya’s ex-prime minister Odinga mangles his numbers on government revenue share in Nigeria - Africa Check Skip to main content English Français Main navigation Fact-checks Reports Factsheets Guides Spot Checks Blog Meta programme fact-checks Republish our work Who we are Our team Our impact How we are funded Partners Get in touch What we do Info Finder African Fact-Checking Awards Corrections Fact-checking research Training Media Literacy Educator knowledge hub How we fact-check Corrections policy Code of principles How we rate claims Get Involved Donate Submit a claim to fact-check Partner with us Join our team Fact-checking tips Quizzes Donate Back to Africa Check Kenya’s ex-prime minister Odinga mangles his numbers on government revenue share in Nigeria Published on 23 September 2020 Claim Three claims about how revenue is shared between Nigeria’s three levels of government. Verdict One correct, two incorrect Source Kenya’s former prime minister Raila Odinga (August 2020) This article is more than 4 years old Since 2004 Nigeria’s revenue sharing formula has given 52.68% to the federal government, 26.72% to states and 20.60% to local governments. Odinga was correct about local governments’ share, but wide of the mark for the other two government levels. And experts question his claim that Nigeria’s system “works perfectly well”. After months of an often fractious stalemate , in September 2020 Kenya’s senate hammered out a deal on how revenue would be shared between the country’s two levels of government. In August, at the height of the deadlock, former prime minister Odinga returned to a familiar talking point to argue for establishing a third tier of government. Building on this in an interview with Citizen TV , Odinga, who is also an African Union envoy , said Kenya could solve the recurring battle over how to share revenue if it looked to Nigeria for lessons. Nigeria, he said, had a local, state and federal system of government. “In terms of revenue share, 20% of the revenue goes to the local, 35% goes to the state and 45% goes to the federal governments ... and it works perfectly well,” Odinga said . We checked if he was on the mark about how revenue is shared in Africa’s largest economy . Claim In Nigeria … in terms of revenue share, 20% goes to the local government. Verdict correct We asked Dennis Onyango, Odinga’s spokesperson, for the source of the former leader’s claims. We will update this report with his response. In line with its constitution , Nigeria has a federal capital authority, 36 states and 768 local government authorities. There are also six area councils. The Revenue Mobilisation, Allocation and Fiscal Commission proposes a formula for how revenue is to be shared between the three levels. This is then approved by the national assembly . The revenue formula was first used in 1982 when the Nigeria Revenue Allocation Act came into effect. The law stipulated that 56% of funds would go to the federal government, 24% to states and 20% to local governments. The current formula can be traced to a March 2004 circular from the finance ministry. It has remained at these levels since. “The revenue allocation formula is still 52.68%, 26.72% and 20.6%,” Prof Sherifdeen Tella, professor of economics at Olabisi Onabanjo University told Africa Check. Before the revenue is split an amount “not less than 13%” is deducted and shared among the oil producing states based on their production levels. According to data from Nigeria's extractive industries transparency initiative , a government agency supervised by the president’s office, local governments get 20.6% of national revenue. We therefore rate Odinga as correct on this claim. Recent local government allocations at 20% The most recent full year data from the budget office shows that in 2019, local governments received N1.04 trillion of the N5.05 trillion available for sharing among the three levels of government. And in the first quarter of 2020, local governments got N441.44 billion of the N2.14 trillion available. Both these amounts work out to about 20% for local governments. (Note: Value-added tax is also shared among the three levels of government, using a different formula. Local governments get 35% of VAT revenue, state governments 50% and the federal government 15%.) Claim 35% of revenue goes to states. Verdict incorrect Data from Nigeria's extractive industries transparency initiative shows that 26.72% is reserved for the state governments, not the 35% Odinga claimed. We therefore rate this claim as incorrect. In 2019, of the N5.05 trillion available for sharing, states got N1.35 trillion. In the first quarter of 2020, states received N572.59 billion of the N2.14 trillion available. Both these allocations work out to 26.72%, in keeping with the formula. Claim 45% of revenue goes to the federal governments. Verdict incorrect Odinga’s claim of 45% is not accurate. Official data shows the federal government gets more than half of the total revenue. In 2019, data from the budget office shows the federal government received N2.66 trillion of the N5.05 trillion available for sharing. In the first quarter of 2020 it got N1.13 trillion out of N2.14 trillion. These amounts tally with the 52.68% set out in the sharing formula. Does Nigeria’s revenue sharing model work ‘perfectly well’? Raila Odinga’s assertion that the Nigerian revenue sharing formula “works perfectly” is contested. Gazie Okpara , a professor of marketing at Abia State University in southeast Nigeria whose interests include social policy, said the formula was imperfect because how the funds were spent was not transparent. “Each level of government should always give an account of how funds were spent,” he said, an audit that should be provided for in the constitution. Prof Sherifdeen Tella, a professor of economics at Olabisi Onabanjo University in southwestern Nigeria, told Africa Check that in his view, allocations to state and local governments, and especially the former, should be increased. “What is allocated to these two tiers of government is not sufficient.” Matthew Akintayo is a professor at the University of Ibadan , also in southwestern Nigeria. One of his focus areas is the economics of education. He told Africa Check that the sharing formula should be restructured. “A bulk or vast fraction of resources should be allocated to the state and local government because both arms of government are closer to the grassroots,” he said. He added that state governors should be given more leeway to manage their resources. John Kinuthia, a senior programme officer at the International Budget Partnership , told Africa Check that Odinga should also have considered the nature of devolved functions when drawing comparisons. It was difficult to compare Kenyan counties with Nigerian states, partly because they had different functions, Kinuthia said. He gave the example of education. “In Nigeria there are functions like education that are devolved, which is why you see a bigger proportion of resources at the subnational level compared to Kenya. In Kenya, education is still at the national level.” Republish our content for free We believe that everyone needs the facts. You can republish the text of this article free of charge, both online and in print. However, we ask that you pay attention to these simple guidelines . In a nutshell: 1. Do not include images, as in most cases we do not own the copyright. 2. Please do not edit the article. 3. Make sure you credit "Africa Check" in the byline and don't forget to mention that the article was originally published on africacheck.org . Name Surname Email Leave this field blank Vincent Ng’ethe in Nairobi and Motunrayo Joel in Lagos Claim Three claims about how revenue is shared between Nigeria’s three levels of government. Verdict One correct, two incorrect Source Kenya’s former prime minister Raila Odinga (August 2020) Join us on WhatsApp Further Reading false Nigeria Biafra Nnamdi Kanu arrest government No evidence Biafran pro-independence leader Nnamdi Kanu's wife and son arrested by Nigerian government scam Kenya government free online courses online scam No, Kenyan government not offering free online courses to all adults Kenya Economy William Ruto diaspora remittance revenue GDP #RutoRecordReport Precision or spin? Evaluating Kenyan president Ruto’s mid-term economic scorecard Add new comment Your name Comment About text formats Restricted HTML Allowed HTML tags: <a href hreflang> <em> <strong> <cite> <blockquote cite> <code> <ul type> <ol start type> <li> <dl> <dt> <dd> <h2 id> <h3 id> <h4 id> <h5 id> <h6 id> Lines and paragraphs break automatically. Web page addresses and email addresses turn into links automatically. limit: 600 characters Leave this field blank Sign up to our newsletter Name Africa Check values your trust and is committed to the responsible management, use and protection of personal information. See our privacy policy. Leave this field blank Spot Checks View All false Nigeria Biafra Nnamdi Kanu arrest government No evidence Biafran pro-independence leader Nnamdi Kanu's wife and son arrested by Nigerian government scam Kenya government free online courses online scam No, Kenyan government not offering free online courses to all adults Kenya Economy William Ruto diaspora remittance revenue GDP #RutoRecordReport Precision or spin? Evaluating Kenyan president Ruto’s mid-term economic scorecard We hold public figures accountable For democracy to function, public figures need to be held to account for what they say. The claims they make need to be checked, openly and impartially. Africa Check is an independent, non-partisan organisation which assesses claims made in the public arena using journalistic skills and evidence drawn from the latest online tools, readers, public sources and experts, sorting fact from fiction and publishing the results. Browse by category Health Covid-19 Education Crime Economy Kenya Nigeria Senegal South Africa Sign up to our newsletter Name Africa Check values your trust and is committed to the responsible management, use and protection of personal information. See our privacy policy. Leave this field blank Follow us Facebook Twitter Instagram TikTok Footer About Partner With Us Terms and Conditions Contact Us Sitemap Want to keep reading our fact-checks? We will never charge you for verified, reliable information. Help us keep it that way by supporting our work. Become a newsletter subscriber Name Africa Check values your trust and is committed to the responsible management, use and protection of personal information. See our privacy policy. Leave this field blank Support independent fact-checking in Africa. See our donation optionsWith His Amnesty Order, President Biden Is Making Illegal Immigration Legal - U.... Skip to content U.S. Senator Marsha Blackburn of Tennessee Menu Skip navigation About Marsha Toggle Submenu Committee Assignments Services Toggle Submenu Academy Nominations Federal Grants Flag Requests Help With A Federal Agency Hurricane Helene Internships Scheduling Requests Student Resources Tennessee Tuesday Tour Requests Veteran Resources Inauguration Ticket Requests U.S. Attorney Appointments in Tennessee U.S. District Court Appointments in Tennessee U.S. Marshal Appointments in Tennessee Issues Toggle Submenu Agriculture Border Security China Crime Education Energy Fighting "Wokeness" Health Care Human Trafficking Israel Jobs & Economy The Kids Online Safety Act Military & Veterans National Security Protecting Life Technology Women Newsroom Toggle Submenu News Subscribe to the Blackburn Report Speeches Columns Contact Marsha Toggle Submenu Email Me Call My Office Search layout.input-label Search Facebook Twitter Instagram YouTube Columns Home Newsroom Columns With His Amnesty Order, President Biden Is Making Illegal Immigration Legal June 24, 2024 550,000. That is the estimated number of illegal aliens who will receive amnesty under President Biden’s latest executive action, which will make many of the migrants eligible for green cards, work permits, and a pathway to U.S. citizenship. According to President Biden, this decision is “commonsense.” But to millions of Tennesseans and Americans, it is just the latest example of how the President is working to undermine the rule of law, devalue U.S. citizenship, and make illegal immigration legal. In just his first 100 days in office, President Biden issued 94 executive orders to open our border, including halting construction of the southern border wall, ending the successful Trump-era Remain in Mexico policy, and pausing deportations. Since then, more than 10 million illegal aliens have entered our country—larger than the population of 38 states. Despite the many harms of their open border agenda, President Biden and Democrats have championed it for a simple reason : to gain more seats in Congress. Thanks to a day-one executive order by President Biden, illegal aliens count toward the census population, which determines each state’s share of congressional seats. By taking in as many illegal aliens as possible, Democrat states can help offset the loss of hundreds of thousands of Americans who are fleeing blue jurisdictions for red states. By granting amnesty to hundreds of thousands of illegals, the Biden administration is building on this effort, setting the stage for illegal immigrants to potentially vote in future U.S. elections. Last week, I wrote a letter to President Biden pointing out that his amnesty proposal is blatantly unconstitutional by side-stepping congressional authority to alter the legal status of hundreds of thousands of illegals. To be sure, I expect federal courts will deem President Biden’s action unlawful, much like President Obama’s 2012 Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals memorandum, which also extended deportation protections to illegal immigrants. Still, while President Biden pushes ahead with his unconstitutional amnesty plan and open border agenda, the American people will be left to deal with the consequences—including a record surge in migrant crime. Since October alone, U.S. authorities have apprehended 13,130 illegal aliens with prior criminal convictions—including homicide, burglary, assault, drug trafficking, and sexual offenses—up from 2,438 in fiscal year 2020, the last full year of the Trump administration. In 2023, that number was 15,267—a more than five-fold increase from 2020. Just last week, an illegal alien from Ecuador, who crossed the southern border in 2021, was arrested for raping a 13-year-old girl while wielding a machete in a park in Queens, New York. Also last week, Houston police arrested two Venezuelan illegal aliens for kidnapping and strangling a 12-year-old girl before leaving her body in a bayou. The suspects allegedly committed the heinous crime just weeks after the Biden administration released them into our country after they illegally crossed the southern border. And earlier this month, law enforcement arrested a Salvadoran illegal alien for raping and murdering a 37-year-old mother of five in Maryland. The suspect, who is also accused of murdering a woman in El Salvador and assaulting a 9-year-old girl and her mother in Los Angeles, crossed the southern border four times last year. These horrific crimes would have never happened if President Biden secured our southern border. Instead, the President is more concerned about protecting illegal aliens than American citizens—with tragic consequences. https://www.blackburn.senate.gov/2024/6/with-his-amnesty-order-president-biden-is-making-illegal-immigration-legal News Subscribe to the Blackburn Report Speeches Columns Office Locations Memphis Jackson Nashville Chattanooga Knoxville Tri-cities D.C. Memphis Office 100 Peabody Place Suite 1125 Memphis, TN 38103 Phone: (901) 527-9199 Fax: (901) 527-9515 Jackson Office 109 S Highland Ave Suite 218 Jackson, TN 38301 Phone: (731) 660-3971 Fax: (731) 660-3978 Nashville Office 719 Church Street Suite 2100 Nashville, TN 37203 Phone: (629) 800-6600 Fax: (615) 298-2148 Chattanooga Office 10 West M. L. King Blvd 6th Floor Chattanooga, TN 37402 Phone: (423) 541-2939 Fax: (423) 541-2944 Knoxville Office 800 Market Street Suite 121 Knoxville, TN 37902 Phone: (865) 540-3781 Fax: (865) 540-7952 Tri-cities Office 207 Mocking Bird Ln Suite 502 Johnson City, TN 37604 Phone: (423) 753-4009 Fax: (423) 788-0250 Washington D.C. Office 357 Dirksen Senate Office Building Washington, DC 20510 Phone: (202) 224-3344 Fax: (202) 228-0566 Privacy PolicyBiden said he'd stop building the border wall, but is now going ahead on one piece : NPR Accessibility links Skip to main content Keyboard shortcuts for audio player Open Navigation Menu Newsletters NPR Shop Close Navigation Menu Home News Expand/collapse submenu for News National World Politics Business Health Science Climate Race Culture Expand/collapse submenu for Culture Books Movies Television Pop Culture Food Art & Design Performing Arts Life Kit Gaming Music Expand/collapse submenu for Music All Songs Considered Tiny Desk New Music Friday Music Features Live Sessions Podcasts & Shows Expand/collapse submenu for Podcasts & Shows Daily Morning Edition Weekend Edition Saturday Weekend Edition Sunday All Things Considered Fresh Air Up First Featured Embedded The NPR Politics Podcast Throughline Trump's Terms More Podcasts & Shows Search Newsletters NPR Shop All Songs Considered Tiny Desk New Music Friday Music Features Live Sessions About NPR Diversity Support Careers Press Ethics Biden said he'd stop building the border wall, but is now going ahead on one piece President Biden pledged to stop work on the wall on the southern border. But this week, his administration said it's moving forward on a piece of it. Politics Biden said he'd stop building the border wall, but is now going ahead on one piece October 6, 2023 4:16 PM ET Heard on All Things Considered By Joel Rose , Asma Khalid Biden said he'd stop building the border wall, but is now going ahead on one piece Listen · 5:10 5:10 Transcript Toggle more options Download Embed Embed < iframe src="https://www.npr.org/player/embed/1204349523/1204349524" width="100%" height="290" frameborder="0" scrolling="no" title="NPR embedded audio player"> Transcript President Biden pledged to stop work on the wall on the southern border. But this week, his administration said it's moving forward on a piece of it. Sponsor Message ARI SHAPIRO, HOST: When President Biden was running for office, he pledged to stop work on the wall. The wall on the southern border had been a signature policy of his predecessor, former President Donald Trump. But this week his administration said, in fact, it is moving forward with a piece of that wall in Texas. Two of our correspondents are here to talk about why this is happening and what it means politically for Biden. NPR's Joel Rose covers immigration, and Asma Khalid is our White House correspondent. Good to have you both here. ASMA KHALID, BYLINE: It's good to be here. JOEL ROSE, BYLINE: Hey, Ari. SHAPIRO: Joel, let's start with you. Where exactly is this segment of border wall? And why has it become this big flashpoint? ROSE: Yeah, this is a segment of up to 20 miles of wall in the Rio Grande Valley in Texas, rural Starr County, just outside of McAllen, which has been a big crossing hotspot this year. The planning for this has been in the works for years. The money was actually appropriated during the Trump administration, but it became a big deal this week when the Biden administration put a notice in the Federal Register saying that it would waive more than two dozen environmental laws to build this segment of wall. It is not the first border wall that's been built under the Biden administration. They have completed some other sections. But it would be the first major segment to begin construction on his watch. And as you've noted, this is a reversal of some of his earlier promises, and that has touched off a lot of anger. SHAPIRO: So, Asma, how did the White House justify this? What are they saying? KHALID: Yeah, well, I was at the White House yesterday. And we went into the Oval Office for a few minutes to cover this meeting that the president was having with a couple folks within his national security team. And he was pressed on why he's agreeing to build this new chunk of wall, despite the fact that he pledged during the 2020 campaign not to do this. And I think we should hear the president's response in his own words. (SOUNDBITE OF ARCHIVED RECORDING) PRESIDENT JOE BIDEN: The border wall money was appropriated for the border wall. I tried to get them to reappropriate it to redirect that money. They didn't. They wouldn't. And in the meantime, there's nothing under the law, and they have to use the money for what it was appropriated. KHALID: So are you basically what he was saying is that Congress has the power of the purse. They directed the money to be spent on this, and he had to comply with the law. It is a message that he reiterated earlier today as well - that basically, his administration had no choice in this matter. He was also asked by a reporter if he believes the border wall works. And he said simply, no. This White House went through great lengths, I would say, in the last 24 hours to say that this is not an administration change in policy. They do not believe the border wall is effective. They think other, you know, tools, technology and surveillance would be more effective uses of this money. But ultimately, they say they have no choice. I want to say one last thing, Ari, here, and that is that the way that this was all rolled out, the Federal Register notice did cause a lot of confusion. And this really dominated the White House press briefing yesterday. And I don't think the White House has been or was very clear about why it was doing it at this particular moment. SHAPIRO: Well, let's talk about how this fits into the Biden administration's border policy. Joel, can you put this development in context for us? ROSE: Yeah. Well, so Homeland Security Secretary Alejandro Mayorkas also insisted yesterday that this is not a shift in policy when it comes to border walls. He said, quote, "There will be no more wall construction," unquote. That said, the administration is very much trying to get illegal border crossings down. Those crossings were lower for a while over the summer after the administration rolled out some new legal pathways and tougher enforcement measures at the border. But now crossings are climbing again sharply, near the record numbers that we saw last year. And a single-month record of 50,000 Venezuelan migrants crossed in September fleeing from economic and political turmoil there. The Biden administration said yesterday, by the way, that it will resume deportation flights directly to Venezuela, but it is not clear how many flights there will be or if that's really going to have much of an effect on migration. KHALID: Yeah, and if I can jump in here, I mean, the president has been under enormous pressure on this issue of immigration, of course, from the right but also now from Democratic mayors and governors who are saying that their cities are overwhelmed, their resources are overwhelmed with just the sheer number of migrants who have been arriving. And in recent weeks, there've actually been a flurry of meetings between top White House officials and some of these governors and mayors, Democrats. SHAPIRO: And President Biden is, needless to say, running for reelection. So talk about the politics of this. How is this likely to play with constituents? KHALID: I think the real place where this could potentially pose a challenge for Biden is with the progressive wing of his own party, younger Democratic voters. They are disappointed that he did not choose, they say, to slow walk this border wall, that even if he had to comply with it, is there not some way in which he could have maybe just may - kind of let the clock run out here? For example, Representative Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez of New York said yesterday that the Biden administration did not have to waive the environmental laws to expedite this process. I will say the White House is extremely sensitive to the fact that young voters are a key part of their coalition that they need for Biden to win reelection. There's been a whole slew of things that they've announced recently - I'm thinking of the Climate Corps, this Gun Violence Prevention office - that really are issues that matter to young voters. I don't really know how this will all play out. I will say, though, that the challenge Biden faces, I think, on immigration is that it's an issue where he's pushed on the right, but he's also pushed from different flanks of his own party. And they don't all agree on what to do. SHAPIRO: NPR's Asma Khalid and Joel Rose, thank you both. KHALID: Thank you. ROSE: Thanks. Copyright © 2023 NPR. All rights reserved. Visit our website terms of use and permissions pages at www.npr.org for further information. Accuracy and availability of NPR transcripts may vary. Transcript text may be revised to correct errors or match updates to audio. Audio on npr.org may be edited after its original broadcast or publication. The authoritative record of NPR’s programming is the audio record. Facebook Flipboard Email Read & Listen Home News Culture Music Podcasts & Shows Connect Newsletters Facebook Instagram Press Public Editor Corrections Contact & Help About NPR Overview Diversity NPR Network Accessibility Ethics Finances Get Involved Support Public Radio Sponsor NPR NPR Careers NPR Shop NPR Events NPR Extra Terms of Use Privacy Your Privacy Choices Text Only Sponsor Message Sponsor Message Become an NPR sponsorJudge rejects Biden's plan for undocumented spouses of US citizens Skip to content British Broadcasting Corporation Home News Sport Business Innovation Culture Arts Travel Earth Audio Video Live Home News Israel-Gaza War War in Ukraine US & Canada UK UK Politics England N. Ireland N. Ireland Politics Scotland Scotland Politics Wales Wales Politics Africa Asia China India Australia Europe Latin America Middle East In Pictures BBC InDepth BBC Verify Sport Business Executive Lounge Technology of Business Future of Business Innovation Technology Science & Health Artificial Intelligence AI v the Mind Culture Film & TV Music Art & Design Style Books Entertainment News Arts Arts in Motion Travel Destinations Africa Antarctica Asia Australia and Pacific Caribbean & Bermuda Central America Europe Middle East North America South America World’s Table Culture & Experiences Adventures The SpeciaList Earth Natural Wonders Weather & Science Climate Solutions Sustainable Business Green Living Audio Podcasts Radio Audio FAQs Video Live Live News Live Sport Home News Sport Business Innovation Culture Arts Travel Earth Audio Video Live Weather Newsletters Judge rejects Biden plan for undocumented spouses 8 November 2024 Share Save Madeline Halpert BBC News, New York Share Save AFP The Biden administration can appeal the ruling, but it comes as Trump is set to take office and has pledged an overhaul of US immigration rules A federal judge has struck down President Joe Biden's plan to facilitate a pathway to US citizenship for undocumented immigrants married to American citizens. US District Court Judge Campbell Barker, an appointee of Donald Trump, said the Biden administration lacked the authority to establish the programme. The judge sided with a lawsuit filed by 16 Republican-led states that argued the Biden administration should not be able to bypass Congress to enact immigration legislation. Judge Barker had already temporarily blocked the programme for hundreds of thousands of undocumented immigrants days after it took effect in August. The White House said in a statement that it strongly disagreed with the ruling and was evaluating next steps. “This ruling sides with Republican state officials who are seeking to force US citizens and their families, people who have lived in the United States for more than ten years, to either separate or live in the shadows in constant fear of deportation," White House spokesman Angelo Fernández Hernández said. "Our Administration believes in keeping American families together," he added. The Department of Homeland Security said it was "deeply disappointed" by the ruling. "We firmly believe Keeping Families Together is grounded in well-established legal authority, and its purpose is consistent with fundamental American values." Trump-aligned group America First Legal, which was involved in the lawsuit against the plan, celebrated the ruling. “Since day one, the Biden-Harris Administration has dedicated itself to the decimation of our immigration system and the erasure of our borders," said executive director Gene Hamilton. The Republican states "succeeded in stopping an illegal program that would have provided amnesty to hundreds of thousands of illegal aliens", he added. The Keeping Families Together programme, which Biden announced in August, has sought to allow undocumented immigrants married to US citizens living in the country for a decade or more the possibility of getting a green card without leaving the US. After three years, residents with green cards who are married to US citizens would be able to apply for citizenship. The Biden administration said about half a million undocumented immigrants were eligible for the initiative. He launched the plan just weeks after taking actions to limit the number of asylum claims at the US border, amid a record number of crossings. The administration can appeal Judge Barker's ruling, but it's likely to remain in limbo as Donald Trump takes over the White House. The Republican president-elect has pledged an overhaul of US immigration laws as well as "mass deportations". Biden had argued that the new plan would allow families to remain together, and that the old system separated families. Critics, meanwhile, claimed that it offered amnesty for migrants who entered the country illegally. Texas judge blocks Biden plan for migrant spouses Biden to give legal status to 500,000 undocumented spouses Seven things Trump says he will do as president Immigration US immigration United States Joe Biden Related What we know about Kilmar Abrego Garcia and MS-13 allegations 6 days ago World Trump administration reverses termination of foreign students' visas 25 Apr 2025 US & Canada Indian restaurant shut after illegal workers found 25 Apr 2025 England More 2 hrs ago Joe Biden on Trump: 'What president ever talks like that? That's not who we are' Exclusive: The former president tells Nick Robinson his verdict on his successor's first 100 days and his "grave concern" for the future of the Atlantic Alliance 2 hrs ago BBC InDepth 2 hrs ago Trump appeasing Putin with pressure on Ukraine, Biden tells BBC In his first interview since leaving office, the 82-year-old criticises his successor's handling of the war and is challenged on his own record. 2 hrs ago World 2 hrs ago Watch: Biden's first interview since leaving the White House Former US President Joe Biden talks Trump, Russia and US-Europe relations with the BBC's Today programme. 2 hrs ago US & Canada 4 hrs ago Five Venezuelan opposition members 'rescued' from Caracas, US says The politicians, who had been sheltering at the Argentinian embassy in Caracas for over a year to avoid arrest, are now on US soil. 4 hrs ago World 4 hrs ago JD Vance's brother advances in run for Cincinnati mayor Cory Bowman, who was endorsed by Vance, will face off with the city's Democratic incumbent mayor after finishing second in Tuesday's primary. 4 hrs ago US & Canada British Broadcasting Corporation Home News Sport Business Innovation Culture Arts Travel Earth Audio Video Live Weather BBC Shop BritBox BBC in other languages Follow BBC on: Terms of Use About the BBC Privacy Policy Cookies Accessibility Help Contact the BBC Advertise with us Do not share or sell my info Contact technical support Copyright 2025 BBC. All rights reserved. The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites. Read about our approach to external linking.Biden administration will expand health care coverage for immigrants under DACA - ABC News ABC News Video Live Shows Shop Stream on Biden administration will expand health care coverage for immigrants under DACA As many as 100,000 uninsured people could sign up for health coverage. By Quinn Owen May 3, 2024, 5:11 AM 1:04 Participant holds a protest sign at a rally as immigration advocates and allies gathered at Battery Park, New York City, on Oct. 26, 2019. Erik Mcgregor/LightRocket via Getty Images, FILE The Biden administration has finalized plans to expand government-subsidized health insurance for people brought to the country illegally as children but shielded from deportation under the Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals program. Immigrants with DACA status receive protections from deportation but had been formerly barred from receiving health care coverage made available by the Affordable Care Act. But now, an estimated 100,000 previously uninsured DACA holders can enroll in coverage, according to the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services, fulfilling a pledge the White House made last year. MORE: Judge again finds DACA illegal but doesn't strike down existing protections "Dreamers are our neighbors and friends; They are students, teachers, social workers, doctors, and nurses. More importantly, they are fellow Americans," Department of Health and Human Services Secretary Xavier Becerra said in a statement on Thursday, referring to the frequent nickname for DACA holders. "More than one third of DACA recipients currently do not have health insurance, so making them eligible to enroll in coverage will improve their health and wellbeing, and help the overall economy," Becerra said. A woman holds a banner during a protest supporting DACA, Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals, at Foley Square in New York, on Aug. 17, 2021. Kena Betancur/AFP via Getty Images, FILE DACA holders are currently three times more likely to be uninsured and those who are uninsured are generally less likely to seek out preventative care, Becerra said. MORE: Undocumented immigrant turns Ph.D. hopes into reality The new policy will take effect in November. Household income and the option to obtain health coverage from an employer will be factors in coverage eligibility, an administration official said. Participant holds a protest sign at a rally as immigration advocates and allies gathered at Battery Park, New York City, on Oct. 26, 2019. Erik Mcgregor/LightRocket via Getty Images, FILE "This final rule also reflects the president's belief that health care is a right not a privilege for all Americans, that it should extend to DACA recipients just like the rest of us," White House Domestic Policy Advisor Neera Tanden told reporters. "This landmark final rule will make DACA recipients eligible for the Affordable Care Act coverage for the first time." The Obama-era DACA program, which dates back to 2012, is controversial among conservatives and has long been tied up in legal battles. The Biden administration is seeking to protect it from further legal scrutiny by codifying it into regulatory policy -- an ongoing process. The Biden administration has also faced criticism from some advocates and Democrats for abandoning a potential pathway to citizenship for DACA holders as part of bipartisan Senate negotiations on immigration earlier this year. Democrats continue to blame Republicans for rejecting that deal despite the long-time objections of many in the GOP to a citizenship pathway for migrants already living in the country after entering illegally. Related Topics Biden Administration Sponsored Content by Taboola Popular Reads Catholic community reacts to Trump's fake image of himself as pope May 5, 2:29 PM Trump calls for famed Alcatraz prison to be reopened May 5, 2:53 AM 5 charged in 'human smuggling operation' after boat incident leaves 3 dead 3 hours ago Trump admin live updates: Trump says Houthis have 'capitulated' to US May 6, 5:25 PM ABC News Live 24/7 coverage of breaking news and live events ABC News Network Privacy Policy Your US State Privacy Rights Children's Online Privacy Policy Interest-Based Ads About Nielsen Measurement Terms of Use Do Not Sell or Share My Personal Information Contact Us © 2025 ABC NewsFact-checks | PolitiFact The Poynter Institute Menu Donate State Editions California Florida Iowa Michigan New Hampshire New York North Carolina Pennsylvania Texas West Virginia Wisconsin Issues All Issues Online hoaxes Coronavirus Health Care Immigration Extremism Taxes Marijuana Environment Crime Guns Foreign Policy LGBTQ+ People Donald Trump JD Vance Mitch McConnell Mike Johnson Joe Biden Media PunditFact Tucker Carlson Sean Hannity Rachel Maddow Bloggers PolitiFact Videos Campaigns 2024 Elections Truth-o-Meter True Mostly True Half True Mostly False False Pants on Fire Promises MAGA-Meter Biden Promise Tracker Trump-O-Meter Obameter Latest Promises About Us Our Process Our Staff En Español Who pays for PolitiFact? Advertise with Us Suggest a Fact-check Corrections and Updates Newsletters Donate Follow us The Facts Newsletter Sign up English Español Stand up for the facts! Our only agenda is to publish the truth so you can be an informed participant in democracy. We need your help. More Info I would like to contribute One Time Monthly Yearly Join Now Latest Fact-checks on Howard Marklein Clear Any Rating True Mostly True Half True Mostly False False Pants on Fire Full Flop Half Flip No Flip Any Speaker Any Date Range Last 3 Months Last 6 Months Last 12 Months 2025 2024 2023 2022 2021 2020 2019 2018 2017 2016 2015 2014 2013 2012 2011 2010 2009 2008 2007 Any Category Howard Marklein stated on August 25, 2020 in News release: Says Gov. Tony Evers and Lt. Gov. Mandela Barnes, after police shooting of Jacob Blake, "did not call for peace. They did not encourage calm. By D.L. Davis • August 28, 2020 Howard Marklein stated on March 3, 2015 in a budget hearing: Beer drinking is not allowed in any Illinois state parks. By James B. Nelson • March 20, 2015 Offices District of Columbia 1800 I Street NW Washington, DC 20006 Florida 801 3rd St. S St. Petersburg, FL 33701 727-821-9494 People Donald Trump JD Vance Mitch McConnell Mike Johnson Joe Biden State Editions California Florida Iowa Michigan New Hampshire New York North Carolina Pennsylvania Texas West Virginia Wisconsin About Us Our Process Our Staff En Español Who pays for PolitiFact? Advertise with Us Corrections and Updates Newsletters RSS Feeds Recent Articles and Fact-checks Recent Fact-checks Suggest a Fact-check Follow us The Facts Newsletter Sign up Terms & Conditions Privacy Policy Copyright ©All Rights Reserved Poynter Institute 2020, a 501(c)(3) nonprofit organizationPolitiFact | Claim that Evers, Barnes did not call for peace, calm after Blake shooting goes too far The Poynter Institute Menu Donate State Editions California Florida Iowa Michigan New Hampshire New York North Carolina Pennsylvania Texas West Virginia Wisconsin Issues All Issues Online hoaxes Coronavirus Health Care Immigration Extremism Taxes Marijuana Environment Crime Guns Foreign Policy LGBTQ+ People Donald Trump JD Vance Mitch McConnell Mike Johnson Joe Biden Media PunditFact Tucker Carlson Sean Hannity Rachel Maddow Bloggers PolitiFact Videos Campaigns 2024 Elections Truth-o-Meter True Mostly True Half True Mostly False False Pants on Fire Promises MAGA-Meter Biden Promise Tracker Trump-O-Meter Obameter Latest Promises About Us Our Process Our Staff En Español Who pays for PolitiFact? Advertise with Us Suggest a Fact-check Corrections and Updates Newsletters Donate Follow us The Facts Newsletter Sign up English Español Stand up for the facts! Our only agenda is to publish the truth so you can be an informed participant in democracy. We need your help. More Info I would like to contribute One Time Monthly Yearly Join Now Howard Marklein stated on August 25, 2020 in News release: Says Gov. Tony Evers and Lt. Gov. Mandela Barnes, after police shooting of Jacob Blake, "did not call for peace. They did not encourage calm. National Legal Issues Guns Wisconsin Howard Marklein By D.L. Davis August 28, 2020 Claim that Evers, Barnes did not call for peace, calm after Blake shooting goes too far If Your Time is short In an August 23, 2020 Evers news release there was no call for calm or peace. In a 10-minute August 24, 2020 video address, Evers and Barnes did not directly reference violence and damage in Kenosha the night before. But during that August 24, 2020 video, Evers did say "every person should be able to make their voices heard" and "If you are exercising that right today and in the days ahead, please do so peacefully." Evers did not more forcefully criticize the Kenosha violence until after Marklein’s statement. See the sources for this fact-check The national protests over police brutality that started in Minnesota after a Minneapolis police officer killed George Floyd by kneeling for nearly nine minutes on his neck have now focused squarely on Wisconsin. On Sunday August 23, 2020, a Kenosha police officer shot Jacob Blake in the back multiple times at close range as Blake tried to get into a small SUV. Protests re-ignited across the country, including in Madison and, of course, Kenosha, where buildings were vandalized and burned, windows smashed out and stores looted. State Sen. Howard Marklein, R-Spring Green, decried the destruction in an August 25, 2020, news release and Facebook post. "There is absolutely no justification for the vandalism, destruction, rioting and looting that took place at the State Capitol, in the City of Madison or the City of Kenosha last night," Marklein posted on Facebook . Then he took aim at the state’s Democratic leaders. Sign up for PolitiFact texts "We need leadership in this state to take a stand, protect our citizens and call for peace, rather than capitulating to violent mobs. Governor Tony Evers and Lieutenant Governor Mandela Barnes made irresponsible comments about the incident in Kenosha before having all of the facts. They did not call for peace. They did not encourage calm." The statement came before a night of chaos involving protesters and armed militia members left two men dead and a third man injured. Kyle Rittenhouse, 17, of Antioch, Ill., is charged with shooting the men. Rittenhouse is a self-described militia member. We’ll focus on the last part of Marklein’s claim. Did Evers and Barnes "not call for peace" and "not encourage calm" in the wake of the Blake shooting? The evidence When asked to provide backup for the statement, Katy Prange, Marklein’s chief of staff, focused on the timing and context of statements made by Evers and Barnes. Let’s look at the sequence. Here is the complete August 23, 2020 news release from the governor’s office, hours after the incident: MADISON — Gov. Evers tonight released the following statement regarding the officer-involved shooting that critically injured a Black man in Kenosha. "Tonight, Jacob Blake was shot in the back multiple times, in broad daylight, in Kenosha, Wisconsin. Kathy and I join his family, friends, and neighbors in hoping earnestly that he will not succumb to his injuries. While we do not have all of the details yet, what we know for certain is that he is not the first Black man or person to have been shot or injured or mercilessly killed at the hands of individuals in law enforcement in our state or our country. We stand with all those who have and continue to demand justice, equity, and accountability for Black lives in our country—lives like those of George Floyd, of Breonna Taylor, Tony Robinson, Dontre Hamilton, Ernest Lacy, and Sylville Smith. And we stand against excessive use of force and immediate escalation when engaging with Black Wisconsinites. I have said all along that although we must offer our empathy, equally important is our action. In the coming days, we will demand just that of elected officials in our state who have failed to recognize the racism in our state and our country for far too long." There was no call for peace or calm in the statement. The following morning, Evers’s office issued a video message : In the video address, neither Evers nor Barnes mentioned the violence or damage from the previous night, but they did ask that those protesting "do so peacefully." Featured Fact-check Pete Hegseth stated on March 24, 2025 in an interview "Nobody was texting war plans" in the Trump administration Signal group text about bombing Yemen. By Grace Abels • March 26, 2025 Marklein’s statement was posted on Facebook at 11:06 a.m. the next day, August 25. So, that’s our starting point for the accuracy of the claim. We also looked at Barnes’ tweets and Facebook posts, but did not find any reference to calling for peace or calm prior to Marklein’s post. In a news release later that day, Evers said: "Tonight, and in the days ahead, if you are going to protest, please do so peacefully and safely. Please do not allow the actions of a few distract us from the work we must do together to demand justice, equity, and accountability." So, clearly, that statement from Evers -- his strongest on the question of peace and calm -- came after Marklein’s claim. Britt Cudaback, Evers’ deputy communications director, argued Evers had called for a peaceful protest the day before Marklein’s claim, citing the video message Barnes’ communications director Chet Agni, said Marklein was making "broad claims." "Our administration has been calling for people to exercise their First Amendment rights peacefully and safely since before Sen. Marklein released his statement, just as our administration did during the unrest following the murder of George Floyd months ago," he said in an email. That said, our research, and the information provided by the offices of Evers and Barnes, shows a single reference to "peacefully" before the Marklein statement was made. Our ruling Marklein claimed that Evers and Barnes, after the police shooting of Jacob Blake, "did not call for peace. They did not encourage calm." The governor did not call for peace and calm in his statement hours after the incident. But in a video statement posted the next day, Evers urged people planning to protest to "do so peacefully." That said, his most direct comments -- saying the Kenosha protests went too far -- didn’t come until after Marklein’s statement. We rate Marklein’s claim Mostly False. Read About Our Process The Principles of the Truth-O-Meter Our Sources Milwaukee Journal Sentinel, " 2 shot dead and 1 injured in Kenosha during protests ," August 26, 2020. Sen. Howard Marklein, Facebook , August 25, 2020 Email, Katy Prange, Marklein’s chief of staff, August 26, 2020 Email Britt Cudaback, Evers’ deputy communications director, August 26, 2020 Email, Chet Agni Barnes’ communication director, August 28, 2020 Milwaukee Journal Sentinel, "Illinois teen charged in shooting deaths of two people during Kenosha protests ," August 26, 2020. YouTube, " Gov. Evers, Lt. Gov. Barnes address Wisconsiinites following officer-involved shooting in Kenosha , August 24, 2020. Gov. Tony Evers " Gov. Evers releases statement on Kenosha shooting, " August 23, 2020. Gov. Tony Evers, Facebook , August 24, 2020. Gov. Tony Evers, Twitter , August 25, 2020. Gov. Tony Evers, " Gov. Evers releases statement on last night’s protests ," August 25, 2020. Browse the Truth-O-Meter More by D.L. Davis Susan Crawford stated on March 12, 2025 in TV debate: "Brad Schimel said that he wanted to be part of Donald Trump's support network." By D.L. Davis • March 28, 2025 Cavalier Johnson stated on January 19, 2025 in TV interview: “After the referendum, Milwaukee Public Schools has a larger tax levy than the City of Milwaukee.” By D.L. Davis • March 3, 2025 Social Media stated on December 1, 2024 in X, formerly Twitter: “Trump won 18-to-24-year-olds in Wisconsin." By D.L. Davis • January 6, 2025 Tammy Baldwin stated on October 18, 2024 in TV debate: Says opponent Eric Hovde “opposes efforts to negotiate with the big pharmaceutical companies to lower the price of prescription drugs.” By D.L. Davis • October 31, 2024 Eric Hovde stated on October 18, 2024 in TV debate: Ballot drop boxes 'were only used for a pandemic.' By D.L. Davis • October 25, 2024 Eric Hovde stated on September 5, 2024 in Campaign ad: Says Democratic opponent Tammy Baldwin "gave stimulus checks to illegals." By D.L. Davis • October 11, 2024 Robert Cowles stated on July 12, 2024 in Radio address: “The most recent State Budget increased funding for the Department of Tourism by 98 percent.” By D.L. Davis • September 16, 2024 Joe Biden stated on May 16, 2024 in News release: "The Trump administration handed out taxpayer dollars to a foreign company. Hundreds of homes and farms were bulldozed, and over $500 million in taxpayer dollars were wasted preparing for Foxconn." By D.L. Davis • July 13, 2024 Ron Johnson stated on April 15, 2024 in Podcast: "Every Senate Democrat has voted to support unlimited abortions up to the moment of birth.” By D.L. Davis • May 17, 2024 Lisa Subeck stated on February 16, 2024 in X, formerly Twitter: “The United States is an outlier, one of only about half a dozen countries, without any guarantee of paid leave for new parents and/or other health care needs.” By D.L. Davis • April 16, 2024 Tammy Baldwin stated on February 1, 2024 in Facebook post: “Big drug companies charge as little as $7 for an inhaler overseas and nearly $500 for the exact same one here in the US.” By D.L. Davis • February 23, 2024 Robin Vos stated on January 7, 2024 in TV interview: “The law in Wisconsin (on abortion time limit) is 20 weeks. That is way outside the international bounds.” By D.L. Davis • February 9, 2024 Cindi Duchow stated on November 9, 2023 in Wisconsin Assembly: "Unfortunately during COVID, the clerks in Madison and Milwaukee told their constituents that they were actually indefinitely confined and did not have to come and vote, which was incorrect." By D.L. Davis • January 26, 2024 Ron Tusler stated on September 12, 2023 in X, formerly Twitter: Wisconsin Republicans are backing “a nonpartisan redistricting plan based off the Iowa Model. ... Republicans, Democrats, and the Governor pushed this plan last time redistricting happened in 2020.” By D.L. Davis • December 8, 2023 Rebecca Cooke stated on September 1, 2023 in X, formerly Twitter: "Derrick Van Orden is one of the only members of Congress who participated in the deadly January 6th insurrection. He now serves in the building he tried to burn down." By D.L. Davis • October 11, 2023 Claim that Evers, Barnes did not call for peace, calm after Blake shooting goes too far Clear Any Rating True Mostly True Half True Mostly False False Pants on Fire Full Flop Half Flip No Flip Any Speaker Any Date Range Last 3 Months Last 6 Months Last 12 Months 2025 2024 2023 2022 2021 2020 2019 2018 2017 2016 2015 2014 2013 2012 2011 2010 2009 2008 2007 Any Category Moms Demand Action for Gun Sense In America stated on April 17, 2025 in a Threads post: “Gun violence is the leading killer of college-aged people in the U.S.” By Loreben Tuquero • April 22, 2025 Michael Lawler stated on March 21, 2025 in a television interview: “If we don’t pass the tax bill by the end of the year, we will have the largest tax increase in American history.” By Jill Terreri Ramos • April 22, 2025 TikTok posts stated on April 21, 2025 in TikTok posts: “The Simpsons” predicted Pope Francis’ 2025 death. By Claire Cranford • April 22, 2025 X posts stated on April 13, 2025 in a post on X: Arizona Democrats “needed a lawsuit to force them to remove 50,000 noncitizens from voter rolls.” By Madison Czopek • April 18, 2025 Facebook posts stated on April 16, 2025 in Facebook posts: Former U.S. Rep. Liz Cheney wrote a viral letter to Democrats suggesting steps to take against the Trump administration. By Loreben Tuquero • April 18, 2025 Byron Donalds stated on April 10, 2025 in a NewsNation interview: Under the SAVE Act, “as long as you have a Real ID … it should be easy for you to register to vote.” By Grace Abels • April 18, 2025 Tim Walz stated on April 6, 2025 in an interview: “Less than half of Americans have $1,000 in savings.” By Claire Cranford • April 16, 2025 X posts stated on April 13, 2025 in a post on X: Cody Balmer, the person charged with setting fire to Pennsylvania governor’s residence, posted a photo that said “F--- Trump.” By Madison Czopek • April 14, 2025 TikTok posts stated on April 5, 2025 in a TikTok post: U.S. Rep. Jasmine Crockett says “she ‘simply forgot' to inform Social Security that her grandmother died in 2012 … She’s been collecting $2,600 a month for 13 years.” By Maria Briceño • April 14, 2025 X posts stated on April 6, 2025 in a post: Photos and videos show Washington, D.C., protests against White House adviser Elon Musk are “staged & paid — bussed in, scripted, clocked out.” By Grace Abels • April 11, 2025 Load more Support independent fact-checking. Become a member! In a world of wild talk and fake news, help us stand up for the facts. Sign me up Offices District of Columbia 1800 I Street NW Washington, DC 20006 Florida 801 3rd St. S St. Petersburg, FL 33701 727-821-9494 People Donald Trump JD Vance Mitch McConnell Mike Johnson Joe Biden State Editions California Florida Iowa Michigan New Hampshire New York North Carolina Pennsylvania Texas West Virginia Wisconsin About Us Our Process Our Staff En Español Who pays for PolitiFact? Advertise with Us Corrections and Updates Newsletters RSS Feeds Recent Articles and Fact-checks Recent Fact-checks Suggest a Fact-check Follow us The Facts Newsletter Sign up Terms & Conditions Privacy Policy Copyright ©All Rights Reserved Poynter Institute 2020, a 501(c)(3) nonprofit organizationPolitiFact | Claim that Evers, Barnes did not call for peace, calm after Blake shooting goes too far The Poynter Institute Menu Donate State Editions California Florida Iowa Michigan New Hampshire New York North Carolina Pennsylvania Texas West Virginia Wisconsin Issues All Issues Online hoaxes Coronavirus Health Care Immigration Extremism Taxes Marijuana Environment Crime Guns Foreign Policy LGBTQ+ People Donald Trump JD Vance Mitch McConnell Mike Johnson Joe Biden Media PunditFact Tucker Carlson Sean Hannity Rachel Maddow Bloggers PolitiFact Videos Campaigns 2024 Elections Truth-o-Meter True Mostly True Half True Mostly False False Pants on Fire Promises MAGA-Meter Biden Promise Tracker Trump-O-Meter Obameter Latest Promises About Us Our Process Our Staff En Español Who pays for PolitiFact? Advertise with Us Suggest a Fact-check Corrections and Updates Newsletters Donate Follow us The Facts Newsletter Sign up English Español Stand up for the facts! Our only agenda is to publish the truth so you can be an informed participant in democracy. We need your help. More Info I would like to contribute One Time Monthly Yearly Join Now Howard Marklein stated on August 25, 2020 in News release: Says Gov. Tony Evers and Lt. Gov. Mandela Barnes, after police shooting of Jacob Blake, "did not call for peace. They did not encourage calm. National Legal Issues Guns Wisconsin Howard Marklein By D.L. Davis August 28, 2020 Claim that Evers, Barnes did not call for peace, calm after Blake shooting goes too far If Your Time is short In an August 23, 2020 Evers news release there was no call for calm or peace. In a 10-minute August 24, 2020 video address, Evers and Barnes did not directly reference violence and damage in Kenosha the night before. But during that August 24, 2020 video, Evers did say "every person should be able to make their voices heard" and "If you are exercising that right today and in the days ahead, please do so peacefully." Evers did not more forcefully criticize the Kenosha violence until after Marklein’s statement. See the sources for this fact-check The national protests over police brutality that started in Minnesota after a Minneapolis police officer killed George Floyd by kneeling for nearly nine minutes on his neck have now focused squarely on Wisconsin. On Sunday August 23, 2020, a Kenosha police officer shot Jacob Blake in the back multiple times at close range as Blake tried to get into a small SUV. Protests re-ignited across the country, including in Madison and, of course, Kenosha, where buildings were vandalized and burned, windows smashed out and stores looted. State Sen. Howard Marklein, R-Spring Green, decried the destruction in an August 25, 2020, news release and Facebook post. "There is absolutely no justification for the vandalism, destruction, rioting and looting that took place at the State Capitol, in the City of Madison or the City of Kenosha last night," Marklein posted on Facebook . Then he took aim at the state’s Democratic leaders. Sign up for PolitiFact texts "We need leadership in this state to take a stand, protect our citizens and call for peace, rather than capitulating to violent mobs. Governor Tony Evers and Lieutenant Governor Mandela Barnes made irresponsible comments about the incident in Kenosha before having all of the facts. They did not call for peace. They did not encourage calm." The statement came before a night of chaos involving protesters and armed militia members left two men dead and a third man injured. Kyle Rittenhouse, 17, of Antioch, Ill., is charged with shooting the men. Rittenhouse is a self-described militia member. We’ll focus on the last part of Marklein’s claim. Did Evers and Barnes "not call for peace" and "not encourage calm" in the wake of the Blake shooting? The evidence When asked to provide backup for the statement, Katy Prange, Marklein’s chief of staff, focused on the timing and context of statements made by Evers and Barnes. Let’s look at the sequence. Here is the complete August 23, 2020 news release from the governor’s office, hours after the incident: MADISON — Gov. Evers tonight released the following statement regarding the officer-involved shooting that critically injured a Black man in Kenosha. "Tonight, Jacob Blake was shot in the back multiple times, in broad daylight, in Kenosha, Wisconsin. Kathy and I join his family, friends, and neighbors in hoping earnestly that he will not succumb to his injuries. While we do not have all of the details yet, what we know for certain is that he is not the first Black man or person to have been shot or injured or mercilessly killed at the hands of individuals in law enforcement in our state or our country. We stand with all those who have and continue to demand justice, equity, and accountability for Black lives in our country—lives like those of George Floyd, of Breonna Taylor, Tony Robinson, Dontre Hamilton, Ernest Lacy, and Sylville Smith. And we stand against excessive use of force and immediate escalation when engaging with Black Wisconsinites. I have said all along that although we must offer our empathy, equally important is our action. In the coming days, we will demand just that of elected officials in our state who have failed to recognize the racism in our state and our country for far too long." There was no call for peace or calm in the statement. The following morning, Evers’s office issued a video message : In the video address, neither Evers nor Barnes mentioned the violence or damage from the previous night, but they did ask that those protesting "do so peacefully." Featured Fact-check Pete Hegseth stated on March 24, 2025 in an interview "Nobody was texting war plans" in the Trump administration Signal group text about bombing Yemen. By Grace Abels • March 26, 2025 Marklein’s statement was posted on Facebook at 11:06 a.m. the next day, August 25. So, that’s our starting point for the accuracy of the claim. We also looked at Barnes’ tweets and Facebook posts, but did not find any reference to calling for peace or calm prior to Marklein’s post. In a news release later that day, Evers said: "Tonight, and in the days ahead, if you are going to protest, please do so peacefully and safely. Please do not allow the actions of a few distract us from the work we must do together to demand justice, equity, and accountability." So, clearly, that statement from Evers -- his strongest on the question of peace and calm -- came after Marklein’s claim. Britt Cudaback, Evers’ deputy communications director, argued Evers had called for a peaceful protest the day before Marklein’s claim, citing the video message Barnes’ communications director Chet Agni, said Marklein was making "broad claims." "Our administration has been calling for people to exercise their First Amendment rights peacefully and safely since before Sen. Marklein released his statement, just as our administration did during the unrest following the murder of George Floyd months ago," he said in an email. That said, our research, and the information provided by the offices of Evers and Barnes, shows a single reference to "peacefully" before the Marklein statement was made. Our ruling Marklein claimed that Evers and Barnes, after the police shooting of Jacob Blake, "did not call for peace. They did not encourage calm." The governor did not call for peace and calm in his statement hours after the incident. But in a video statement posted the next day, Evers urged people planning to protest to "do so peacefully." That said, his most direct comments -- saying the Kenosha protests went too far -- didn’t come until after Marklein’s statement. We rate Marklein’s claim Mostly False. Read About Our Process The Principles of the Truth-O-Meter Our Sources Milwaukee Journal Sentinel, " 2 shot dead and 1 injured in Kenosha during protests ," August 26, 2020. Sen. Howard Marklein, Facebook , August 25, 2020 Email, Katy Prange, Marklein’s chief of staff, August 26, 2020 Email Britt Cudaback, Evers’ deputy communications director, August 26, 2020 Email, Chet Agni Barnes’ communication director, August 28, 2020 Milwaukee Journal Sentinel, "Illinois teen charged in shooting deaths of two people during Kenosha protests ," August 26, 2020. YouTube, " Gov. Evers, Lt. Gov. Barnes address Wisconsiinites following officer-involved shooting in Kenosha , August 24, 2020. Gov. Tony Evers " Gov. Evers releases statement on Kenosha shooting, " August 23, 2020. Gov. Tony Evers, Facebook , August 24, 2020. Gov. Tony Evers, Twitter , August 25, 2020. Gov. Tony Evers, " Gov. Evers releases statement on last night’s protests ," August 25, 2020. Browse the Truth-O-Meter More by D.L. Davis Susan Crawford stated on March 12, 2025 in TV debate: "Brad Schimel said that he wanted to be part of Donald Trump's support network." By D.L. Davis • March 28, 2025 Cavalier Johnson stated on January 19, 2025 in TV interview: “After the referendum, Milwaukee Public Schools has a larger tax levy than the City of Milwaukee.” By D.L. Davis • March 3, 2025 Social Media stated on December 1, 2024 in X, formerly Twitter: “Trump won 18-to-24-year-olds in Wisconsin." By D.L. Davis • January 6, 2025 Tammy Baldwin stated on October 18, 2024 in TV debate: Says opponent Eric Hovde “opposes efforts to negotiate with the big pharmaceutical companies to lower the price of prescription drugs.” By D.L. Davis • October 31, 2024 Eric Hovde stated on October 18, 2024 in TV debate: Ballot drop boxes 'were only used for a pandemic.' By D.L. Davis • October 25, 2024 Eric Hovde stated on September 5, 2024 in Campaign ad: Says Democratic opponent Tammy Baldwin "gave stimulus checks to illegals." By D.L. Davis • October 11, 2024 Robert Cowles stated on July 12, 2024 in Radio address: “The most recent State Budget increased funding for the Department of Tourism by 98 percent.” By D.L. Davis • September 16, 2024 Joe Biden stated on May 16, 2024 in News release: "The Trump administration handed out taxpayer dollars to a foreign company. Hundreds of homes and farms were bulldozed, and over $500 million in taxpayer dollars were wasted preparing for Foxconn." By D.L. Davis • July 13, 2024 Ron Johnson stated on April 15, 2024 in Podcast: "Every Senate Democrat has voted to support unlimited abortions up to the moment of birth.” By D.L. Davis • May 17, 2024 Lisa Subeck stated on February 16, 2024 in X, formerly Twitter: “The United States is an outlier, one of only about half a dozen countries, without any guarantee of paid leave for new parents and/or other health care needs.” By D.L. Davis • April 16, 2024 Tammy Baldwin stated on February 1, 2024 in Facebook post: “Big drug companies charge as little as $7 for an inhaler overseas and nearly $500 for the exact same one here in the US.” By D.L. Davis • February 23, 2024 Robin Vos stated on January 7, 2024 in TV interview: “The law in Wisconsin (on abortion time limit) is 20 weeks. That is way outside the international bounds.” By D.L. Davis • February 9, 2024 Cindi Duchow stated on November 9, 2023 in Wisconsin Assembly: "Unfortunately during COVID, the clerks in Madison and Milwaukee told their constituents that they were actually indefinitely confined and did not have to come and vote, which was incorrect." By D.L. Davis • January 26, 2024 Ron Tusler stated on September 12, 2023 in X, formerly Twitter: Wisconsin Republicans are backing “a nonpartisan redistricting plan based off the Iowa Model. ... Republicans, Democrats, and the Governor pushed this plan last time redistricting happened in 2020.” By D.L. Davis • December 8, 2023 Rebecca Cooke stated on September 1, 2023 in X, formerly Twitter: "Derrick Van Orden is one of the only members of Congress who participated in the deadly January 6th insurrection. He now serves in the building he tried to burn down." By D.L. Davis • October 11, 2023 Claim that Evers, Barnes did not call for peace, calm after Blake shooting goes too far Clear Any Rating True Mostly True Half True Mostly False False Pants on Fire Full Flop Half Flip No Flip Any Speaker Any Date Range Last 3 Months Last 6 Months Last 12 Months 2025 2024 2023 2022 2021 2020 2019 2018 2017 2016 2015 2014 2013 2012 2011 2010 2009 2008 2007 Any Category Moms Demand Action for Gun Sense In America stated on April 17, 2025 in a Threads post: “Gun violence is the leading killer of college-aged people in the U.S.” By Loreben Tuquero • April 22, 2025 Michael Lawler stated on March 21, 2025 in a television interview: “If we don’t pass the tax bill by the end of the year, we will have the largest tax increase in American history.” By Jill Terreri Ramos • April 22, 2025 TikTok posts stated on April 21, 2025 in TikTok posts: “The Simpsons” predicted Pope Francis’ 2025 death. By Claire Cranford • April 22, 2025 X posts stated on April 13, 2025 in a post on X: Arizona Democrats “needed a lawsuit to force them to remove 50,000 noncitizens from voter rolls.” By Madison Czopek • April 18, 2025 Facebook posts stated on April 16, 2025 in Facebook posts: Former U.S. Rep. Liz Cheney wrote a viral letter to Democrats suggesting steps to take against the Trump administration. By Loreben Tuquero • April 18, 2025 Byron Donalds stated on April 10, 2025 in a NewsNation interview: Under the SAVE Act, “as long as you have a Real ID … it should be easy for you to register to vote.” By Grace Abels • April 18, 2025 Tim Walz stated on April 6, 2025 in an interview: “Less than half of Americans have $1,000 in savings.” By Claire Cranford • April 16, 2025 X posts stated on April 13, 2025 in a post on X: Cody Balmer, the person charged with setting fire to Pennsylvania governor’s residence, posted a photo that said “F--- Trump.” By Madison Czopek • April 14, 2025 TikTok posts stated on April 5, 2025 in a TikTok post: U.S. Rep. Jasmine Crockett says “she ‘simply forgot' to inform Social Security that her grandmother died in 2012 … She’s been collecting $2,600 a month for 13 years.” By Maria Briceño • April 14, 2025 X posts stated on April 6, 2025 in a post: Photos and videos show Washington, D.C., protests against White House adviser Elon Musk are “staged & paid — bussed in, scripted, clocked out.” By Grace Abels • April 11, 2025 Load more Support independent fact-checking. Become a member! In a world of wild talk and fake news, help us stand up for the facts. Sign me up Offices District of Columbia 1800 I Street NW Washington, DC 20006 Florida 801 3rd St. S St. Petersburg, FL 33701 727-821-9494 People Donald Trump JD Vance Mitch McConnell Mike Johnson Joe Biden State Editions California Florida Iowa Michigan New Hampshire New York North Carolina Pennsylvania Texas West Virginia Wisconsin About Us Our Process Our Staff En Español Who pays for PolitiFact? Advertise with Us Corrections and Updates Newsletters RSS Feeds Recent Articles and Fact-checks Recent Fact-checks Suggest a Fact-check Follow us The Facts Newsletter Sign up Terms & Conditions Privacy Policy Copyright ©All Rights Reserved Poynter Institute 2020, a 501(c)(3) nonprofit organizationCLAT Exam Date: CLAT 2020 exam to be held on September 7 | - Times of India Edition IN IN US Sign In TOI Education News RBSE Class 12 Result RBSE Class 10 Result Exams Results Jobs Boards Careers Brain Teaser Medicine NEET UG Exam Scholar Spotlight Web Stories Colleges Study Abroad Learning with TOI UP Board 10th Result UP Board 12th Result MP Board 12th Result MP Board 10th Result WBBSE Class 10 Result WBCHSE Class 12 Result BSEB Class 12 Result BSEB Class 10 Result Today's ePaper News Education News News CLAT 2020 exam to be held on September 7 Trending Engineers in India CBSE Notice Countries without IELTS TECH Layoffs GK Unique Birds School Holidays IBPS RRB Clerk PO Result NEET PG Counselling 2024 Career Opportunities in PHD UP Police Admit Card Engineers in India CBSE Notice Countries without IELTS TECH Layoffs GK Unique Birds School Holidays IBPS RRB Clerk PO Result NEET PG Counselling 2024 Career Opportunities in PHD UP Police Admit Card Engineers in India CBSE Notice Countries without IELTS TECH Layoffs GK Unique Birds School Holidays IBPS RRB Clerk PO Result NEET PG Counselling 2024 Career Opportunities in PHD UP Police Admit Card This story is from August 11, 2020 CLAT 2020 exam to be held on September 7 TOI-Online / Aug 11, 2020, 10:19 IST Share AA + Text Size Small Medium Large Follow us The General Body of the Consortium of National Law Universities on Monday held a meeting to review the precautionary measures taken in the context of the COVID 19 pandemic and settle on a feasible date for conducting the CLAT 2020 exam. Representative Image NEW DELHI: Consortium of National Law Universities on Monday released the Common Law Admission Test (CLAT) 2020 date. As per the latest schedule, CLAT 2020 will be conducted on September 7, 2020. The General Body of the Consortium of National Law Universities on Monday held a meeting to review the precautionary measures taken in the context of the COVID 19 pandemic and settle on a feasible date for conducting the CLAT 2020 exam . At this meeting, the General Body assessed the prevailing lockdown situation in various parts of the country and the health and safety protocols necessary for the conduct of this exam. According to the decision of Consortium, the CLAT 2020 examination for both UG and PG candidates will be held on September 7, 2020, from 2:00 pm to 4:00 pm. Per the Consortiumâs notification dated June 30, the CLAT 2020 will be conducted through a centre-based, online computer-based test. The Consortium will review centre locations on an ongoing basis to ensure that students and staff are protected at all times. The Consortium is in the process of securing further permissions so that the CLAT admit cards of candidates can be considered as movement passes by local authorities to allow candidates to move between Containment zones and travel to their designated examination centre. The admit cards will be available for download from the website (consortiumofnlus.ac.in) in 2 weeksâ time. End of Article FOLLOW US ON SOCIAL MEDIA Visual Stories Previous 8 Common Hindi Words You Didn't Know Are Part of Everyday English education â9 Powerful Lessons for Students from the Harry Potter Seriesâ education 10 Countries That Don't Require IELTS for Study education 7 ways ChatGPT can be your study partner education 10 Hindi Words Commonly Used in English That You Might Not Know education âNeed to Say No to Your Boss? 9 Tactful Strategies to Considerâ education Hindi Divas 2024: 10 Must-Know Facts About Hindi for Students education 9 Strategies to Elevate Your Grades from Average to Topperâ education Vampire Squids, Zombie Worms and Ocean Mysteries: 9 Deep Sea Facts for Students education Sitaram Yechury, Politician Par Excellence: His Education and Career Trajectory education Next 1 2 3 Hot Picks Illia Yefimchyk Arvind Kejriwal Bail Annapurna Interactive Staffs Resigned Ex-Miss Switzerland Finalist Haitian Immigrants Stock Market Today Delhi Greater Kailash shooting TOP TRENDING Vande Metro Mandi Mosque Annamalai Hamster Kombat Daily Cipher Codes Annapurna Staff Resign illia yefimchyk Haitian Immigrant Prince Harry Largest Mammals in the World Patrick Mahomes Trending Stories In Education Entire Website Tamil Nadu is already implementing the acceptable components of the NEP but remains opposed to the three-language policy: Minister TS DSC 2024 Results Expected Soon at tgdsc.aptonline.in UP Police Result 2024: All you need to know about UPPRPB constable selection process BSEB Bihar Class 10 board exam 2025 registration begins: Check details here KLEE result 2024: Rank list for 3-year LLB course out, direct link here Assam ASTU result 2024 for B.Tech 6th semester out on astu.ac.in: Direct link to check result here UPPBPB UP police constable answer key 2024 out for Aug 23 exam: Direct link to download here Haryana HPSC PGT admit card 2024 out at hpsc.gov.in: Direct link to download hall ticket here UGC NET Answer Key 2024 Live Updates: NTA to release provisional answer keys for Aug 27-Sept 4 anytime soon Apply for over 50,000 govt job vacancies in September 2024: Check recruitment details from SSC to Indian Railways and more Troops disengaged in 4 areas, including Galwan valley: China Terrorist killed in encounter in J&K's Baramulla No driver, no haggling, Mumbaiâs BKC aims for friendliest taxi service Ind vs Pak: Famous encounters of storied hockey rivalry Tamil Nadu hotelierâs apology to FM over GST remark triggers row 'Water reached tomb of Shahjahan': Leaking from Taj Mahal's dome Why you should not be fooled by â20-year SIP crorepatiâ dream Infosys founder Narayana Murthy: My wife's logic was ... Ind vs Pak: Why is India hot favourite for the ACT hockey match Fake police make woman lawyer strip on video call in Mumbai About us Create Your Own Ad Terms of Use and Grievance Redressal Policy Privacy policy Advertise with us RSS Newsletter Feedback ePaper Sitemap Archives FOLLOW US ON Other Times Group News Sites The Economic Times Hindi Economic Times Navbharat Times Maharashtra Times Vijaya Karnataka Telugu Samayam Tamil Samayam Malayalam Samayam I am Gujarat TimesPoints Indiatimes Brand Capital Education Times Times Food Mumbai Mirror Bangalore Mirror MX Player Hindi Podcast Popular Categories Headlines Sports News Business News India News World News Bollywood News Health+ Tips Indian TV Shows Celebrity Photos Technology News Hot on the Web Kitchen Sponge Side Effects Malaika Arora Father Death News Live Update Stree 2 Collection Vitamin B 12 Weight Gain Vitamins Kanjeevaram Sari Nasa Sister Shivani Kaun Banega Crorepati 16 Top Trends Moin Khan Shreyas Iyer Where to Watch IND vs PAK Hockey Match Shannon Sharpes Net Worth Vande Metro Aadhaar Card Update Tech Layoffs Shannon Sharpe UPSC Mains Admit Card Kristina Joksimovic Way Chatgpt can be your Study Partner Air Taxi India Ayushman Bharat Scheme Kolkata Doctor Rape Case Donald Trump Diljit Dosanjh Live Cricket Score Trending Topics Alia Bhatt Malaika Arora Father Death Arbaaz Khan Natasa Stankovic Mr Bachchan OTT Release National Parks In India Selena Gomez GOAT Collection Vikas Sethi Death Malayalam Producers India's Best Dancer 4 Simi Garewal Dilli Babu Indian National Parks Laung Benefits Vikas Sethi Apple iPhone 16 SpaceX Aadhar Card Update By Sept 14 Wordle Answer Living and entertainment ETimes Travel Destinations Cricbuzz.com TV Lifestyle Newspaper Subscription Food News Times Prime Whats Hot Services CouponDunia TechGig TimesJobs Bollywood News Times Mobile Gadgets Careers Colombia Latest News Regina Cassandra calls herself a 'serial dater,' had many relationships :'But Iâm taking a break now' Kaun Banega Crorepati 16: Can you guess the answer for this Rs 3,20,000 question on Navy, which contestant Naman Jain incorrectly answered? Exclusive - Has Palak Sindhwani aka Sonu from Taarak Mehta Ka Ooltah Chashmah breached her contract; Neela Film Productions to issue a legal notice to the actress? Mexico's president asks Sinaloa cartel to act 'responsibly' as violence escalates in the north Kitchen Tips: How to elevate home cooking to Michelin level Ford drives into India for 3rd time PIL: Publicise laws, penalties to curb crimes against women Growth potential 7.5% or more: RBI governor Hindus take to Bangladesh streets to stop attacks and demand justice E-commerce speeds up to catch up with Quick commerce 'Will take digital public infrastructure stack to 50 nations' Justin Timberlake faces DWI charges: Court-ordered apology, fine and community service Tragic road accident on Mogili ghat road claims seven lives in Chittoor district Donald Trump on another debate with Kamala Harris: 'Maybe, if I got in the right mood ... ' Sebi gives clean chit to NSE, ex-executives in co-location case Rusty or Ready? Falcons' Cousins Falls Flat in $180M NFL Debut Edible oil import duty hiked by 20% Lucky houseplants for each Zodiac, as per a renowned astrologer Copyright Â© 2024 Bennett, Coleman & Co. Ltd. All rights reserved. For reprint rights: Times Syndication ServiceFact-check: No, CLAT 2020 Hasn’t Been Postponed – Viral Notification is Fake! Become a Member Dark Mode Become a Member Pahalgam Terror Attack Raghav's Take Naukri Crisis Uncovering Hate Qisse Kahaniyaan Climate Change India Fights Fraud Members Only WebQoof More My Report Brand Studio Business Tech And Auto FIT Gender Opinion Videos Entertainment World The Quint Lab Sports More Education Explainers Podcasts Politics Graphic Novels Law Members' Opinion South Asians NEON Dark Mode Become a Member Home Naukri Crisis India Fights Fraud Uncovering Hate About Us T&C Privacy Policy BECOME A MEMBER Created by potrace 1.16, written by Peter Selinger 2001-2019 FOLLOW US ON About Us Contact Us Privacy Policy ADVERTISEMENT REMOVE AD No, CLAT 2020 Hasn’t Been Postponed – Viral Notification is Fake! The official authorities issued a notification stating that the date of examination remains unaltered. Sonal Gupta Published : 25 Aug 2020, 9:53 PM IST WebQoof i A a A a Small A a Medium A a Large Amid demands of postponement of entrance examinations like NEET and JEE, a fake notification regarding the postponement of the Common Law Admission Test (CLAT) 2020 is being circulated on social media. The Consortium of National Law Universities responsible for conducting the test has called out the notification, stating that it is false and that the date of examination remains unaltered. CLAIM Several social media users shared the notification which states that the Executive Committee of the Consortium of National Law Universities "unanimously decided to postpone the CLAT 2020 from its scheduled date of 7 September 2020, until further notice." ADVERTISEMENT REMOVE AD WHAT WE FOUND The notification circulating on social media is fake and a clarification was issued by the Consortium of National Law Universities on its official website . In a notification, dated 25 August 2020, the Consortium stated that they had taken cognisance of the fake notification regarding the postponement of the CLAT 2020 examination. “The Consortium hereby categorically states that the Fake Notification has not been issued by the Consortium. The date of the CLAT 2020 examination, and all other particulars, in relation to the CLAT 2020 examination remain unaltered,” the notification read. The date of the examination remains 7 September 2020, as previously notified. (Not convinced of a post or information you came across online and want it verified? Send us the details on WhatsApp at 9643651818, or e-mail it to us at webqoof@thequint.com and we'll fact-check it for you. You can also read all our fact-checked stories here. ) (At The Quint, we question everything. Play an active role in shaping our journalism by becoming a member today.) Read Latest News and Breaking News at The Quint, browse for more from news and webqoof Topics: Webqoof Fact-Check CLAT 2020 Read Full Article Speaking truth to power requires allies like you. Become a Member Monthly 6-Monthly Annual Check Member Benefits Loading Comments... ADVERTISEMENT REMOVE AD Stay Updated ADVERTISEMENT REMOVE AD × × SECTIONS FIT Gender Opinion Videos Entertainment World The Quint Lab Sports Education Explainers Podcasts Politics Graphic Novels Law Members' Opinion South Asians NEON TRENDING TOPICS Rajdeep Sardesai Interview Waqf Land Manoj Bajpayee Interview Minorities in Bangladesh Fact Check Climate Change News Sharad Pawar: Victim of BJP's Uncovering Hate Jharkhand Lynching FOLLOW US ON Quint Hindi FIT About Us Contact Us Privacy Policy T&CCLAT Exam Date: CLAT 2020 exam to be held on September 7 | - Times of India Edition IN IN US Sign In TOI Education News RBSE Class 12 Result RBSE Class 10 Result Exams Results Jobs Boards Careers Brain Teaser Medicine NEET UG Exam Scholar Spotlight Web Stories Colleges Study Abroad Learning with TOI UP Board 10th Result UP Board 12th Result MP Board 12th Result MP Board 10th Result WBBSE Class 10 Result WBCHSE Class 12 Result BSEB Class 12 Result BSEB Class 10 Result Today's ePaper News Education News News CLAT 2020 exam to be held on September 7 Trending Engineers in India CBSE Notice Countries without IELTS TECH Layoffs GK Unique Birds School Holidays IBPS RRB Clerk PO Result NEET PG Counselling 2024 Career Opportunities in PHD UP Police Admit Card Engineers in India CBSE Notice Countries without IELTS TECH Layoffs GK Unique Birds School Holidays IBPS RRB Clerk PO Result NEET PG Counselling 2024 Career Opportunities in PHD UP Police Admit Card Engineers in India CBSE Notice Countries without IELTS TECH Layoffs GK Unique Birds School Holidays IBPS RRB Clerk PO Result NEET PG Counselling 2024 Career Opportunities in PHD UP Police Admit Card This story is from August 11, 2020 CLAT 2020 exam to be held on September 7 TOI-Online / Aug 11, 2020, 10:19 IST Share AA + Text Size Small Medium Large Follow us The General Body of the Consortium of National Law Universities on Monday held a meeting to review the precautionary measures taken in the context of the COVID 19 pandemic and settle on a feasible date for conducting the CLAT 2020 exam. Representative Image NEW DELHI: Consortium of National Law Universities on Monday released the Common Law Admission Test (CLAT) 2020 date. As per the latest schedule, CLAT 2020 will be conducted on September 7, 2020. The General Body of the Consortium of National Law Universities on Monday held a meeting to review the precautionary measures taken in the context of the COVID 19 pandemic and settle on a feasible date for conducting the CLAT 2020 exam . At this meeting, the General Body assessed the prevailing lockdown situation in various parts of the country and the health and safety protocols necessary for the conduct of this exam. According to the decision of Consortium, the CLAT 2020 examination for both UG and PG candidates will be held on September 7, 2020, from 2:00 pm to 4:00 pm. Per the Consortiumâs notification dated June 30, the CLAT 2020 will be conducted through a centre-based, online computer-based test. The Consortium will review centre locations on an ongoing basis to ensure that students and staff are protected at all times. The Consortium is in the process of securing further permissions so that the CLAT admit cards of candidates can be considered as movement passes by local authorities to allow candidates to move between Containment zones and travel to their designated examination centre. The admit cards will be available for download from the website (consortiumofnlus.ac.in) in 2 weeksâ time. End of Article FOLLOW US ON SOCIAL MEDIA Visual Stories Previous 8 Common Hindi Words You Didn't Know Are Part of Everyday English education â9 Powerful Lessons for Students from the Harry Potter Seriesâ education 10 Countries That Don't Require IELTS for Study education 7 ways ChatGPT can be your study partner education 10 Hindi Words Commonly Used in English That You Might Not Know education âNeed to Say No to Your Boss? 9 Tactful Strategies to Considerâ education Hindi Divas 2024: 10 Must-Know Facts About Hindi for Students education 9 Strategies to Elevate Your Grades from Average to Topperâ education Vampire Squids, Zombie Worms and Ocean Mysteries: 9 Deep Sea Facts for Students education Sitaram Yechury, Politician Par Excellence: His Education and Career Trajectory education Next 1 2 3 Hot Picks Illia Yefimchyk Arvind Kejriwal Bail Annapurna Interactive Staffs Resigned Ex-Miss Switzerland Finalist Haitian Immigrants Stock Market Today Delhi Greater Kailash shooting TOP TRENDING Vande Metro Mandi Mosque Annamalai Hamster Kombat Daily Cipher Codes Annapurna Staff Resign illia yefimchyk Haitian Immigrant Prince Harry Largest Mammals in the World Patrick Mahomes Trending Stories In Education Entire Website Tamil Nadu is already implementing the acceptable components of the NEP but remains opposed to the three-language policy: Minister TS DSC 2024 Results Expected Soon at tgdsc.aptonline.in UP Police Result 2024: All you need to know about UPPRPB constable selection process BSEB Bihar Class 10 board exam 2025 registration begins: Check details here KLEE result 2024: Rank list for 3-year LLB course out, direct link here Assam ASTU result 2024 for B.Tech 6th semester out on astu.ac.in: Direct link to check result here UPPBPB UP police constable answer key 2024 out for Aug 23 exam: Direct link to download here Haryana HPSC PGT admit card 2024 out at hpsc.gov.in: Direct link to download hall ticket here UGC NET Answer Key 2024 Live Updates: NTA to release provisional answer keys for Aug 27-Sept 4 anytime soon Apply for over 50,000 govt job vacancies in September 2024: Check recruitment details from SSC to Indian Railways and more Troops disengaged in 4 areas, including Galwan valley: China Terrorist killed in encounter in J&K's Baramulla No driver, no haggling, Mumbaiâs BKC aims for friendliest taxi service Ind vs Pak: Famous encounters of storied hockey rivalry Tamil Nadu hotelierâs apology to FM over GST remark triggers row 'Water reached tomb of Shahjahan': Leaking from Taj Mahal's dome Why you should not be fooled by â20-year SIP crorepatiâ dream Infosys founder Narayana Murthy: My wife's logic was ... Ind vs Pak: Why is India hot favourite for the ACT hockey match Fake police make woman lawyer strip on video call in Mumbai About us Create Your Own Ad Terms of Use and Grievance Redressal Policy Privacy policy Advertise with us RSS Newsletter Feedback ePaper Sitemap Archives FOLLOW US ON Other Times Group News Sites The Economic Times Hindi Economic Times Navbharat Times Maharashtra Times Vijaya Karnataka Telugu Samayam Tamil Samayam Malayalam Samayam I am Gujarat TimesPoints Indiatimes Brand Capital Education Times Times Food Mumbai Mirror Bangalore Mirror MX Player Hindi Podcast Popular Categories Headlines Sports News Business News India News World News Bollywood News Health+ Tips Indian TV Shows Celebrity Photos Technology News Hot on the Web Kitchen Sponge Side Effects Malaika Arora Father Death News Live Update Stree 2 Collection Vitamin B 12 Weight Gain Vitamins Kanjeevaram Sari Nasa Sister Shivani Kaun Banega Crorepati 16 Top Trends Moin Khan Shreyas Iyer Where to Watch IND vs PAK Hockey Match Shannon Sharpes Net Worth Vande Metro Aadhaar Card Update Tech Layoffs Shannon Sharpe UPSC Mains Admit Card Kristina Joksimovic Way Chatgpt can be your Study Partner Air Taxi India Ayushman Bharat Scheme Kolkata Doctor Rape Case Donald Trump Diljit Dosanjh Live Cricket Score Trending Topics Alia Bhatt Malaika Arora Father Death Arbaaz Khan Natasa Stankovic Mr Bachchan OTT Release National Parks In India Selena Gomez GOAT Collection Vikas Sethi Death Malayalam Producers India's Best Dancer 4 Simi Garewal Dilli Babu Indian National Parks Laung Benefits Vikas Sethi Apple iPhone 16 SpaceX Aadhar Card Update By Sept 14 Wordle Answer Living and entertainment ETimes Travel Destinations Cricbuzz.com TV Lifestyle Newspaper Subscription Food News Times Prime Whats Hot Services CouponDunia TechGig TimesJobs Bollywood News Times Mobile Gadgets Careers Colombia Latest News Regina Cassandra calls herself a 'serial dater,' had many relationships :'But Iâm taking a break now' Kaun Banega Crorepati 16: Can you guess the answer for this Rs 3,20,000 question on Navy, which contestant Naman Jain incorrectly answered? Exclusive - Has Palak Sindhwani aka Sonu from Taarak Mehta Ka Ooltah Chashmah breached her contract; Neela Film Productions to issue a legal notice to the actress? Mexico's president asks Sinaloa cartel to act 'responsibly' as violence escalates in the north Kitchen Tips: How to elevate home cooking to Michelin level Ford drives into India for 3rd time PIL: Publicise laws, penalties to curb crimes against women Growth potential 7.5% or more: RBI governor Hindus take to Bangladesh streets to stop attacks and demand justice E-commerce speeds up to catch up with Quick commerce 'Will take digital public infrastructure stack to 50 nations' Justin Timberlake faces DWI charges: Court-ordered apology, fine and community service Tragic road accident on Mogili ghat road claims seven lives in Chittoor district Donald Trump on another debate with Kamala Harris: 'Maybe, if I got in the right mood ... ' Sebi gives clean chit to NSE, ex-executives in co-location case Rusty or Ready? Falcons' Cousins Falls Flat in $180M NFL Debut Edible oil import duty hiked by 20% Lucky houseplants for each Zodiac, as per a renowned astrologer Copyright Â© 2024 Bennett, Coleman & Co. Ltd. All rights reserved. For reprint rights: Times Syndication ServiceTax reform bills increase states' VAT revenue to 55% - Businessday NG Wednesday, May 07, 2025 Go Premium Home Companies & Markets Companies Markets Economy Agriculture Aviation Banking Maritime Real Estate Transportation Legal Business Research post Sports BDFX BD Conferences BD Foundation BusinessDay Intelligence About Us About BusinessDay Our Board Our Management Our Profile CEOFORUM X BusinessDay Home Companies Markets Economy Real Estate Agriculture Aviation Banking Transportation Maritime Legal Business Research post Sports BDFX BD Conferences BD Foundation BusinessDay Intelligence About US Our Board Our Management Our Profile Go Premium LIVE SCORE: Inter 4 vs 3 Barcelona | Home > News > Tax reform bills increase states’ VAT revenue to 55% Tax reform bills increase states’ VAT revenue to 55% Godsgift Onyedinefu November 29, 2024 Share The Tax Reform Bills, which passed second reading at the Senate, have increased the percentage of Value Added Tax (VAT) revenue distributable to states from 50% to 55% while reducing the Federal Government’s share to 10%. The Bills proposed that the revenue distributable to States remains at 35%. The propsoed legislative reforms also proposed zero VAT on exports and essential consumptions by the masses and grant of input VAT credit on assets and services in addition to goods consumed by businesses to lower the cost of production. President Bola Tinubu introduced the Tax Reform Bills, comprising the Joint Revenue Board of Nigeria (Establishment) Bill, 2024; Nigeria Revenue Service (Establishment) Bill, 2024; Nigeria Revenue Service (Establishment) Bill, 2024 and Nigeria Tax Bill, 2024. The bills elicited spirited interests among key lawmakers and stakeholders across party lines, a situation that informed the leadership of the Senate to invite both Taiwo Oyedele and Zacch Adedeji, Chairman, the Presidential Fiscal Policy and Tax Reforms Committee and Chairman, the Federal Inland Revenue Service, respectively, to brief its plenary. Leading debate at the plenary on Thursday, Bamidele Opeyemi, the Senate leader explained that the Bills were aimed at simplifying the tax landscape, reducing the burden on small business and streamlining how taxes are collected. In the area of tax exemptions, Bamidele pointed out that those, whose salaries are not more than the minimum wage from Pay As You Earn (PAYE) deductions, would be exempted from the tax regime. He also said small businesses with annual turnover of N50 million or less “are equally exempted from payment of taxes,” a key pro-business initiative that encourages job creation; deepens ease of doing business and incentivises more investments. Similarly, the senate leader explained that there was a proposed huge reduction in company income tax from the current 30% to 25% that would last for at least two years. Related News Landlords, developers to reap big from FG’s tax reform Once told he’d amount to nothing — now Chef Izu Ani owns some of Dubai’s finest restaurants The largest S&P 500 companies from 1990 to 2024: A 35-year shift in market power “As part of deliberate attempt to curtail the incidence of double taxation and multiplicity of taxes and levies, multiple taxes hitherto paid by companies under various tax heads namely 2.5% education tax, 0.25% NASENI tax have been harmonized into a development level of 2% which by 2030 will be applied to fund the newly established student loan scheme which will benefit many Nigerian youths. “Unlike what is obtainable under the existing tax regime whereby the Federal Government takes a lion share of VAT revenues, it is proposed that the sharing formula should allow the State Government share 55% of VAT revenue from the current 15% to 10% sharing formula. “However, Local Governments share of VAT revenue remains unaffected. Relatedly, basic items consumed by Nigerian households such as food items, medical services and pharmaceuticals, educational fees, electricity etc. are exempted from VAT. “Again, as part of efforts to ease the administration of income taxes and levies across the Federation, there is a reasonable effort made to consolidate core tax statutes and related tax legislations,” Bamidele explained. Contrary to publuc opinion regarding the intendment of the Bills under consideration, Bamidele explained that the bills contained innovative and people-oriented proposals as part of the government’s deliberate fiscal and tax reform measures to cushion the effect of ongoing broader economic policies such as the removal of subsidy on petroleum products, renewed efforts to implement cost -reflective electricity tariffs in the power sector etc on Nigerian citizens. In his contribution, Ali Ndume (Borno South), former Chief Whip of the Senate, claimed that his problem was about timing and the issue of derivation. He added that the Constitution of the Federal Republic of Nigeria, 1999 (as amended) must be amended before the Tax Reform Bills should take effect, therefore calling for its immediate withdrawal. “I am not against the reform, my problem is timing and the issue of derivation make the reform contagious. The 1999 Constitution has to be amended before the bills can be effective”, he observed. Share Join BusinessDay whatsapp Channel, to stay up to date Open In Whatsapp YOU MIGHT ALSO LIKE News FG launches committee to overhaul NYSC, targets stronger impact News Wigwe’s helicopter crash linked to ‘pilot spatial disorientation, company’s negligence’ - Report News Landlords, developers to reap big from FG’s tax reform Business Day, established in 2001, is a daily business newspaper based in Lagos. It is the only Nigerian newspaper with a bureau in Accra, Ghana. It has both daily and Sunday titles. It circulates in Nigeria and Ghana... Read More... The Company About Us BusinessDay Pro Research & Insight Conferences BD Fx Legal & Privacy Terms & Conditions Privacy Policy Copyright Quick Links Companies Market Economy ePapers Support Adverts & Rates Support Contact Us © BUSINESSDAY MEDIA LTD 2025.Tax reform bills increase states' VAT revenue to 55% - Businessday NG Wednesday, May 07, 2025 Go Premium Home Companies & Markets Companies Markets Economy Agriculture Aviation Banking Maritime Real Estate Transportation Legal Business Research post Sports BDFX BD Conferences BD Foundation BusinessDay Intelligence About Us About BusinessDay Our Board Our Management Our Profile CEOFORUM X BusinessDay Home Companies Markets Economy Real Estate Agriculture Aviation Banking Transportation Maritime Legal Business Research post Sports BDFX BD Conferences BD Foundation BusinessDay Intelligence About US Our Board Our Management Our Profile Go Premium LIVE SCORE: Inter 4 vs 3 Barcelona | Home > News > Tax reform bills increase states’ VAT revenue to 55% Tax reform bills increase states’ VAT revenue to 55% Godsgift Onyedinefu November 29, 2024 Share The Tax Reform Bills, which passed second reading at the Senate, have increased the percentage of Value Added Tax (VAT) revenue distributable to states from 50% to 55% while reducing the Federal Government’s share to 10%. The Bills proposed that the revenue distributable to States remains at 35%. The propsoed legislative reforms also proposed zero VAT on exports and essential consumptions by the masses and grant of input VAT credit on assets and services in addition to goods consumed by businesses to lower the cost of production. President Bola Tinubu introduced the Tax Reform Bills, comprising the Joint Revenue Board of Nigeria (Establishment) Bill, 2024; Nigeria Revenue Service (Establishment) Bill, 2024; Nigeria Revenue Service (Establishment) Bill, 2024 and Nigeria Tax Bill, 2024. The bills elicited spirited interests among key lawmakers and stakeholders across party lines, a situation that informed the leadership of the Senate to invite both Taiwo Oyedele and Zacch Adedeji, Chairman, the Presidential Fiscal Policy and Tax Reforms Committee and Chairman, the Federal Inland Revenue Service, respectively, to brief its plenary. Leading debate at the plenary on Thursday, Bamidele Opeyemi, the Senate leader explained that the Bills were aimed at simplifying the tax landscape, reducing the burden on small business and streamlining how taxes are collected. In the area of tax exemptions, Bamidele pointed out that those, whose salaries are not more than the minimum wage from Pay As You Earn (PAYE) deductions, would be exempted from the tax regime. He also said small businesses with annual turnover of N50 million or less “are equally exempted from payment of taxes,” a key pro-business initiative that encourages job creation; deepens ease of doing business and incentivises more investments. Similarly, the senate leader explained that there was a proposed huge reduction in company income tax from the current 30% to 25% that would last for at least two years. Related News Landlords, developers to reap big from FG’s tax reform Once told he’d amount to nothing — now Chef Izu Ani owns some of Dubai’s finest restaurants The largest S&P 500 companies from 1990 to 2024: A 35-year shift in market power “As part of deliberate attempt to curtail the incidence of double taxation and multiplicity of taxes and levies, multiple taxes hitherto paid by companies under various tax heads namely 2.5% education tax, 0.25% NASENI tax have been harmonized into a development level of 2% which by 2030 will be applied to fund the newly established student loan scheme which will benefit many Nigerian youths. “Unlike what is obtainable under the existing tax regime whereby the Federal Government takes a lion share of VAT revenues, it is proposed that the sharing formula should allow the State Government share 55% of VAT revenue from the current 15% to 10% sharing formula. “However, Local Governments share of VAT revenue remains unaffected. Relatedly, basic items consumed by Nigerian households such as food items, medical services and pharmaceuticals, educational fees, electricity etc. are exempted from VAT. “Again, as part of efforts to ease the administration of income taxes and levies across the Federation, there is a reasonable effort made to consolidate core tax statutes and related tax legislations,” Bamidele explained. Contrary to publuc opinion regarding the intendment of the Bills under consideration, Bamidele explained that the bills contained innovative and people-oriented proposals as part of the government’s deliberate fiscal and tax reform measures to cushion the effect of ongoing broader economic policies such as the removal of subsidy on petroleum products, renewed efforts to implement cost -reflective electricity tariffs in the power sector etc on Nigerian citizens. In his contribution, Ali Ndume (Borno South), former Chief Whip of the Senate, claimed that his problem was about timing and the issue of derivation. He added that the Constitution of the Federal Republic of Nigeria, 1999 (as amended) must be amended before the Tax Reform Bills should take effect, therefore calling for its immediate withdrawal. “I am not against the reform, my problem is timing and the issue of derivation make the reform contagious. The 1999 Constitution has to be amended before the bills can be effective”, he observed. Share Join BusinessDay whatsapp Channel, to stay up to date Open In Whatsapp YOU MIGHT ALSO LIKE News FG launches committee to overhaul NYSC, targets stronger impact News Wigwe’s helicopter crash linked to ‘pilot spatial disorientation, company’s negligence’ - Report News Landlords, developers to reap big from FG’s tax reform Business Day, established in 2001, is a daily business newspaper based in Lagos. It is the only Nigerian newspaper with a bureau in Accra, Ghana. It has both daily and Sunday titles. It circulates in Nigeria and Ghana... Read More... The Company About Us BusinessDay Pro Research & Insight Conferences BD Fx Legal & Privacy Terms & Conditions Privacy Policy Copyright Quick Links Companies Market Economy ePapers Support Adverts & Rates Support Contact Us © BUSINESSDAY MEDIA LTD 2025.Margaret Sanger, Race and Eugenics: A Complicated History | TIME Sign Up for Our Ideas Newsletter POV Subscribe Subscribe Sections Home U.S. Politics World Health Climate Future of Work by Charter Business Tech Entertainment Ideas Science History Sports Magazine TIME 2030 Next Generation Leaders TIME100 Leadership Series TIME Studios Video TIME100 Talks TIMEPieces The TIME Vault TIME for Health TIME for Kids TIME Edge TIMECO2 Red Border: Branded Content by TIME Coupons Join Us Newsletters Subscribe Give a Gift Shop the TIME Store TIME Cover Store Digital Magazine Customer Care US & Canada Global Help Center Reach Out Careers Press Room Contact the Editors Media Kit Reprints and Permissions More About Us Privacy Policy Your Privacy Rights Terms of Use Modern Slavery Statement Site Map Connect with Us Presented By History politics What Margaret Sanger Really Said About Eugenics and Race What Margaret Sanger Really Said About Eugenics and Race 5 minute read circa 1915: Studio headshot portrait of American social reformer Margaret Sanger, founder of the birth control movement. Hulton Archive / Getty Images By Jennifer Latson October 14, 2016 12:00 PM EDT I t was 100 years ago—on Oct. 16, 1916—that Margaret Sanger opened the first birth-control clinic in the United States. An advocate for women’s reproductive rights who was also a vocal eugenics enthusiast, Margaret Sanger leaves a complicated legacy — and one that conservatives have periodically leveraged into sweeping attacks on the organization she helped found: Planned Parenthood. Last year, 25 House Republicans campaigned to have a bust of the pioneering family planner removed from the Smithsonian’s National Portrait Gallery, where it has been included in an exhibit featuring American civil rights leaders, called “The Struggle for Justice,” with Ted Cruz’s office issuing a press release explaining that she didn’t belong there for a number of reasons, the most damning of which is that as part of her “inhumane life’s work” she “advocated for the extermination of African-Americans.” It’s not the first time Sanger has faced this accusation. During this past primary season, Ben Carson proclaimed that Sanger “believed that people like me should be eliminated” —later clarifying, per PolitiFact , that he was “talking about the black race”—and in 2011, Herman Cain alleged that Sanger’s original goal for Planned Parenthood was to “help kill black babies before they came into the world.” Historians and scholars who’ve examined Sanger’s correspondence, as Salon reported in 2011, challenge those who call the activist racist. Much of the controversy stems from a 1939 letter in which Sanger outlined her plan to reach out to black leaders — specifically ministers — to help dispel community suspicions about the family planning clinics she was opening in the South. “We do not want word to go out that we want to exterminate the Negro population, and the minister is the man who can straighten out that idea if it ever occurs to any of their more rebellious members,” she wrote. It was, as the Washington Post called it , an “inartfully written” sentence, but one that, in context, describes the sort of preposterous allegations she feared — not her actual mission. The irony is that it has been used to propagate those very allegations. Cruz’s letter to the director of the National Portrait Gallery, for example, quotes only the first half of the sentence. Sanger’s stated mission was to empower women to make their own reproductive choices. She did focus her efforts on minority communities, because that was where, due to poverty and limited access to health care, women were especially vulnerable to the effects of unplanned pregnancy. As she framed it, birth control was the fundamental women’s rights issue. “Enforced motherhood,” she wrote in 1914 , “is the most complete denial of a woman’s right to life and liberty.” That’s not to say that Sanger didn’t also make some deeply disturbing statements in support of eugenics, the now-discredited movement to improve the overall health and fitness of humankind through selective breeding. She did, and very publicly. In a 1921 article , she wrote that, “the most urgent problem today is how to limit and discourage the over-fertility of the mentally and physically defective.” She was, of course, not alone in this viewpoint: In the 1920s and 1930s, eugenics enjoyed widespread support from mainstream doctors, scientists and the general public. Planned Parenthood officials are quick to note that, despite her thoughts on the idea in general, Sanger “uniformly repudiated the racist exploitation of eugenics principles.” Get your history fix in one place: sign up for the weekly TIME History newsletter In 1966, Martin Luther King Jr. made clear that he agreed that Sanger’s life’s work was anything but inhumane. In 1966, when King received Planned Parenthood’s Margaret Sanger Award in Human Rights, he praised her contributions to the black community. “There is a striking kinship between our movement and Margaret Sanger’s early efforts,” he said . “…Margaret Sanger had to commit what was then called a crime in order to enrich humanity, and today we honor her courage and vision.” As Gloria Steinem pointed out in a 1998 essay for TIME, Sanger’s embrace of the eugenics rhetoric may have been less a heartfelt belief than a political ploy to broaden birth control’s appeal. But even speaking the language of eugenics could be insidious. Steinem writes: [Sanger] adopted the mainstream eugenics language of the day, partly as a tactic, since many eugenicists opposed birth control on the grounds that the educated would use it more. Though her own work was directed toward voluntary birth control and public health programs, her use of eugenics language probably helped justify sterilization abuse. Her misjudgments should cause us to wonder what parallel errors we are making now and to question any tactics that fail to embody the ends we hope to achieve. Read Gloria Steinem’s full essay, here in the TIME archives : Margaret Sanger More Must-Reads from TIME Cybersecurity Experts Are Sounding the Alarm on DOGE Meet the 2025 Women of the Year The Harsh Truth About Disability Inclusion Why Do More Young Adults Have Cancer? Colman Domingo Leads With Radical Love How to Get Better at Doing Things Alone Michelle Zauner Stares Down the Darkness Contact us at letters@time.com Edit Post Home U.S. Politics World Health Business Tech Entertainment Ideas Science History Sports Magazine The TIME Vault TIME For Kids TIMECO2 Coupons TIME Edge Video Masthead Newsletters Subscribe Digital Magazine Give a Gift Shop the TIME Store Careers Modern Slavery Statement Press Room TIME Studios U.S. & Canada Customer Care Global Help Center Contact the Editors Reprints and Permissions Site Map Media Kit Supplied Partner Content About Us © 2024 TIME USA, LLC. All Rights Reserved. Use of this site constitutes acceptance of our Terms of Service , Privacy Policy ( Your Privacy Rights ) and Do Not Sell or Share My Personal Information . TIME may receive compensation for some links to products and services on this website. Offers may be subject to change without notice.Fact Check: Was Planned Parenthood Started To 'Control' The Black Population? : It's All Politics : NPR Accessibility links Skip to main content Keyboard shortcuts for audio player Open Navigation Menu Newsletters NPR Shop Close Navigation Menu Home News Expand/collapse submenu for News National World Politics Business Health Science Climate Race Culture Expand/collapse submenu for Culture Books Movies Television Pop Culture Food Art & Design Performing Arts Life Kit Gaming Music Expand/collapse submenu for Music All Songs Considered Tiny Desk New Music Friday Music Features Live Sessions Podcasts & Shows Expand/collapse submenu for Podcasts & Shows Daily Morning Edition Weekend Edition Saturday Weekend Edition Sunday All Things Considered Fresh Air Up First Featured Embedded The NPR Politics Podcast Throughline Trump's Terms More Podcasts & Shows Search Newsletters NPR Shop All Songs Considered Tiny Desk New Music Friday Music Features Live Sessions About NPR Diversity Support Careers Press Ethics Fact Check: Was Planned Parenthood Started To 'Control' The Black Population? : It's All Politics "I know who Margaret Sanger is, and I know that she believed in eugenics, and that she was not particularly enamored with black people," candidate Ben Carson said of the organization's founder. It's All Politics Political News From NPR Follow The Money Twitter Fact Check Fact Check: Was Planned Parenthood Started To 'Control' The Black Population? August 14, 2015 12:59 PM ET By Amita Kelly Enlarge this image A Planned Parenthood location in New York City. The organization is a presidential-campaign target. Andrew Burton/Getty Images hide caption toggle caption Andrew Burton/Getty Images A Planned Parenthood location in New York City. The organization is a presidential-campaign target. Andrew Burton/Getty Images Ben Carson alleged in an interview with Fox News Wednesday that Planned Parenthood puts most of its clinics in black neighborhoods to "control the population" and that its founder, Margaret Sanger, "was not particularly enamored with black people." Planned Parenthood has been a target on the campaign trail after a series of sting videos was released alleging the organization illegally profits from selling aborted fetal tissue. Carson, a famed neurosurgeon turned Republican presidential candidate, has been a vocal opponent of the group. He was also in the news this week after reports surfaced that he once used aborted fetal tissue for research . Sponsor Message Here's a closer look at Carson's comments: What Carson said On Fox News Wednesday , Carson was asked about Democrats' criticism that Republicans who want to defund Planned Parenthood are waging a "war on women." He responded: "Maybe I am not objective when it comes to Planned Parenthood, but, you know, I know who Margaret Sanger is, and I know that she believed in eugenics, and that she was not particularly enamored with black people. "And one of the reasons you find most of their clinics in black neighborhoods is so that you can find a way to control that population. I think people should go back and read about Margaret Sanger who founded this place — a woman Hillary Clinton by the way says that she admires. Look and see what many people in Nazi Germany thought about her." It's not the first time Planned Parenthood has faced criticism about its founder and the placement of its clinics — former presidential candidate Herman Cain made a similar statement in 2011. What Planned Parenthood said In response, Planned Parenthood said Carson was not only "wrong on the facts, he's flat-out insulting." Alencia Johnson, assistant director of constituency communications, told NPR: "Does he think that black women are somehow less capable of making the deeply personal decision about whether to end a pregnancy than other women? ... It's a shame that a doctor, who should understand the barriers black women face accessing high-quality preventive and reproductive health care services, would pander so clearly to anti-abortion extremists on the right." Sponsor Message Did Margaret Sanger believe in eugenics? Yes, but not in the way Carson implied. Eugenics was a discipline, championed by prominent scientists but now widely debunked, that promoted "good" breeding and aimed to prevent "poor" breeding. The idea was that the human race could be bettered through encouraging people with traits like intelligence, hard work, cleanliness (thought to be genetic) to reproduce. Eugenics was taken to its horrifying extreme during the Holocaust, through forced sterilizations and breeding experiments. In the United States, eugenics intersected with the birth control movement in the 1920s, and Sanger reportedly spoke at eugenics conferences. She also talked about birth control being used to facilitate "the process of weeding out the unfit [and] of preventing the birth of defectives." Historians seem to disagree on just how involved in the eugenics movement she was. Some contend her involvement was for political reasons — to win support for birth control. In reading her papers , it is clear Sanger had bought into the movement. She once wrote that "consequences of breeding from stock lacking human vitality always will give us social problems and perpetuate institutions of charity and crime." "That Sanger was enamored and supported some eugenicists' ideas is certainly true," said Susan Reverby, a health care historian and professor at Wellesley College. But, Reverby added, Sanger's main argument was not eugenics — it was that "Sanger thought people should have the children they wanted." It was a radical idea for the time. Sanger wrote about this mission herself in 1921: "The almost universal demand for practical education in Birth Control is one of the most hopeful signs that the masses themselves today possess the divine spark of regeneration." Was Sanger "not particularly enamored with black people"? Sanger's birth control movement did have support in black neighborhoods, beginning in the '20s when there were leagues in Harlem started by African-Americans. Sanger also worked closely with NAACP founder W.E.B. DuBois on a "Negro Project," which she viewed as a way to get safe contraception to African-Americans. Sponsor Message In 1946, Sanger wrote about the importance of giving "Negro" parents a choice in how many children they would have. "The Negro race has reached a place in its history when every possible effort should be made to have every Negro child count as a valuable contribution to the future of America," she wrote. "Negro parents, like all parents, must create the next generation from strength, not from weakness; from health, not from despair." Her attitude toward African-Americans can certainly be viewed as paternalistic, but there is no evidence she subscribed to the more racist ideas of the time or that she coerced black women into using birth control. In fact, for her time, as the Washington Post noted, "she would likely be considered to have advanced views on race relations." Are most of Planned Parenthood's clinics in black neighborhoods? In 2014, the Guttmacher Institute, a reproductive health research center, surveyed all known abortion providers, including Planned Parenthood clinics, in the U.S. (nearly 2,000) and found that 60 percent are in majority- white neighborhoods. Planned Parenthood has not released numbers on the neighborhoods of its specific clinics, but responding to a request for demographic information, the organization said that in 2013, 14 percent of its patients nationwide were black. That's nearly equal to the proportion of the African-American population in the U.S. However, Carson is tapping into a more subtle sentiment — the targeting of African-Americans in health care systems. There have been documented cases of that happening, including the now-infamous Tuskegee study. Starting in the 1930s, the Tuskegee Institute enrolled black sharecroppers in experiments and allowed them to suffer from syphilis untreated, though they were told they were getting treatment. And, Wellesley's Reverby said, that was sometimes the case for birth control clinics historically, too. They may have been available in communities where more general health care was not, raising some ethical questions. Sponsor Message "One of the issues is ... what happens when you can find birth control clinics but you can't find primary care? It's just a question of what the state's willing to provide for," Reverby said. "Was there overuse of birth control and sterilization in poor communities in some states? Absolutely. It's a complicated story." Did Sanger have a connection to Nazi Germany? Not that NPR found. Sanger herself wrote in 1939 that she had joined the Anti-Nazi Committee "and gave money, my name and any influence I had with writers and others, to combat Hitler's rise to power in Germany." She also said books of hers had been destroyed and that she had intellectual friends who were sent to concentration camps or put to death. Sanger did not have a connection to the Nazis, but a loose association comes through her involvement in the eugenics movement. American and German eugenicists closely collaborated, and the Nazis reportedly borrowed much of their 1933 so-called sterilization law from American models. That law allowed the government to forcibly sterilize people with alleged genetic disorders. abortion Planned Parenthood 2016 Presidential Race Ben Carson Facebook Flipboard Email Read & Listen Home News Culture Music Podcasts & Shows Connect Newsletters Facebook Instagram Press Public Editor Corrections Contact & Help About NPR Overview Diversity NPR Network Accessibility Ethics Finances Get Involved Support Public Radio Sponsor NPR NPR Careers NPR Shop NPR Events NPR Extra Terms of Use Privacy Your Privacy Choices Text Only Sponsor Message Sponsor Message Become an NPR sponsorPolitiFact | Fact-checking Rand Paul on Joe Biden and support for wars The Poynter Institute Menu Donate State Editions California Florida Iowa Michigan New Hampshire New York North Carolina Pennsylvania Texas West Virginia Wisconsin Issues All Issues Online hoaxes Coronavirus Health Care Immigration Extremism Taxes Marijuana Environment Crime Guns Foreign Policy LGBTQ+ People Donald Trump JD Vance Mitch McConnell Mike Johnson Joe Biden Media PunditFact Tucker Carlson Sean Hannity Rachel Maddow Bloggers PolitiFact Videos Campaigns 2024 Elections Truth-o-Meter True Mostly True Half True Mostly False False Pants on Fire Promises MAGA-Meter Biden Promise Tracker Trump-O-Meter Obameter Latest Promises About Us Our Process Our Staff En Español Who pays for PolitiFact? Advertise with Us Suggest a Fact-check Corrections and Updates Newsletters Donate Follow us The Facts Newsletter Sign up English Español Stand up for the facts! Our only agenda is to publish the truth so you can be an informed participant in democracy. We need your help. More Info I would like to contribute One Time Monthly Yearly Join Now Rand Paul stated on August 25, 2020 in a speech at the RNC: Says Joe Biden “voted for the Iraq War … He supported war in Serbia, Syria, Libya.” Iraq Foreign Policy Military Rand Paul Sen. Rand Paul, R-Ky., questions Secretary of State Mike Pompeo during a Senate Foreign Relations committee hearing on the State Department's 2021 budget on Capitol Hill, July 30, 2020, in Washington. (Jim Lo Scalzo/Pool via AP) By Miriam Valverde August 26, 2020 Fact-checking Rand Paul on Joe Biden and support for wars If Your Time is short Biden as a senator voted for resolutions that supported interventions in Iraq and Yugoslavia (Serbia and Montenegro). As vice president, he followed the policies of the Obama administration, which included interventions in Syria and Libya. Biden’s campaign said that Biden as vice president supported going into Syria, but pointed to 2016 reporting that said Biden within the White House argued against intervention in Libya. See the sources for this fact-check Republican Sen. Rand Paul advocated for President Donald Trump’s re-election by portraying him as someone who wants to end wars and casting Democratic presidential nominee Joe Biden as someone "who consistently called for more war." "Joe Biden voted for the Iraq War, which President Trump has long called the worst geopolitical mistake of our generation," Paul said Aug. 25 during the second night of the Republican National Convention. "I fear Biden will choose war again. He supported the war in Serbia, Syria, Libya." Is the senator from Kentucky right about Biden’s record? Biden voted for a resolution that paved the way for the Iraq War, and for a non-binding resolution to authorize military air operations against the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia (Serbia and Montenegro). The conflicts in Syria and Libya happened when Biden was vice president and followed the policies of President Barack Obama. Biden ‘voted for the Iraq War’ This checks out. In 2002, President George W. Bush argued that Iraqi president Saddam Hussein had chemical and biological weapons, sought nuclear weapons, supported terrorism, and threatened peace. In October 2002, then-U.S. Sen. Biden voted in favor of a resolution that authorized Bush to enforce ''all relevant'' United Nations Security Council resolutions on Iraq and if needed, to use military force against Iraq. Sign up for PolitiFact texts In a Senate floor speech before voting for the resolution, Biden said that "failure to overwhelmingly support" the resolution was "likely to enhance the prospects that war will occur." The objective of the resolution was to compel Iraq to destroy its weapons of mass destruction, Biden said. He left open the possibility that Hussein might "miscalculate" and "misjudge" U.S. resolve. In that event, use of military force might be needed, Biden said. The United States invaded Iraq on March 20, 2003, and the war officially ended in late 2011. No weapons of mass destruction were found. In 2005, Biden was asked i n an interview if his 2002 vote was a mistake. "It was a mistake," Biden answered. "It was a mistake to assume the president would use the authority we gave him properly. … We gave the president the authority to unite the world to isolate Saddam. And the fact of the matter is, we went too soon. We went without sufficient force. And we went without a plan." RELATED : Trump still wrong on his claim that he opposed Iraq War ahead of the invasion Biden ‘supported war in Serbia, Syria, Libya’ Serbia : Biden voted for a 1999 concurrent resolution authorizing President Bill Clinton to conduct military air operations and missile strikes against the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia (Serbia and Montenegro), in cooperation with North Atlantic Treaty Organization allies. (Concurrent resolutions express the sentiment of Congress, but are not signed by the president and do not carry the force of law.) Clinton in March 1999 ordered air strikes in response to Yugoslavia’s campaign of violence against ethnic Albanians in the province of Kosovo. The Kosovo conflict erupted in the 1990s between two groups within the former Yugoslavia — Kosovars, who are primarily ethnic Albanians, and Serbs, who are of Slavic descent. The two groups long disputed the territory known as Kosovo. After greater Yugoslavia fractured in the early 1990s, the dispute over Kosovo became violent, pitting the rebel Kosovo Liberation Army against the Serb-dominated government of what remained of Yugoslavia. Paul’s office referenced conflicts in Syria and Libya that started in 2011, when Biden was vice president. Featured Fact-check Paul Krugman stated on November 29, 2009 in ABC's 'This Week with George Stephanopoulos' "If you want to talk firsts for Bush, this was the first time in American history that a president took us into a war and cut taxes." By Robert Farley • November 30, 2009 Syria : Syrians began protesting their government in early 2011 , calling for political and social reforms and the ouster of their president. The protests prompted a violent response from the Syrian government. The conflict escalated as different groups within the country, foreign countries, and terrorists became involved. The United States since 2011 has called for Syria’s President Bashar al-Assad to step aside. The Obama administration in 2014 launched air strikes against the Islamic State in Syria and in 2015 deployed troops there to fight the terrorist group. Biden’s campaign said the Obama-Biden administration supported the Syrian opposition in a variety of ways, including by deploying U.S. forces to combat ISIS. Libya : The United States, as part of a NATO operation, provided air support in an intervention that resulted in the ouster of the country’s longtime dictator, Moammar Gadhafi. Obama said Gadhafi was launching military actions that were causing civilian deaths and forcing ordinary Libyans to escape to neighboring countries, threatening a humanitarian crisis within Libya and instability for its neighbors, Egypt and Tunisia. The U.S. military spent about $2 billion and several months backing the Libyan uprising against Gadhafi. The uprising — part of the Arab Spring — toppled Gadhafi in August 2011, and rebel forces killed him that October. Paul’s office sent us as a 2011 fact-check of Biden as evidence for his support of the U.S. intervention. In that fact-check, we examined Biden’s claim that in Libya, "America spent $2 billion total and didn’t lose a single life." We rated that Mostly True. (The fact-check did not focus on Biden’s own position on the issue.) Biden’s campaign, however, pointed to a 2016 Politico report that referenced an interview Biden gave to journalist Charlie Rose in which he said that intervening in Libya was wrong. The Politico story said that Biden told Rose that he had "argued strongly" within the White House "against going ... to Libya." Politico reported that Biden in that interview also said the United States should not use force unless the interests of the country or its allies are directly threatened, whether it can be done "efficaciously" and whether it can be sustained. Our ruling Paul said Biden, "Voted for the Iraq war … He supported war in Serbia, Syria, Libya." Biden as a senator voted for resolutions that supported interventions in Iraq and Yugoslavia (Serbia and Montenegro). As vice president, he followed the policies of the Obama administration, which included interventions in Syria and Libya. Biden’s campaign said that Biden as vice president supported going into Syria, but pointed to 2016 reporting that said Biden within the White House argued against intervention in Libya. Paul’s claim is accurate but needs clarification or additional information. We rate it Mostly True. Read About Our Process The Principles of the Truth-O-Meter Our Sources Email interview, Sen. Rand Paul’s press office, Aug. 25, 2020 Email interview, Joe Biden’s press office, Aug. 25, 2020 Congressional Research Service, Libya: Conflict, Transition, and U.S. Policy , June 26, 2020; U.S. Armed Forces Abroad: Selected Congressional Votes Since 1982 , Jan. 9, 2020; Libya: Unrest and U.S. Policy , March 29, 2011 Politico, Biden: I was right about Libya , June 21, 2016; Biden suggests 'military solution' to Syrian conflict , Jan. 23, 2016 Govtrack.us, S.Con.Res. 21 (106th): Kosovo resolution PolitiFact, Why Tulsi Gabbard calls the war in Syria a ‘regime change war’ , Oct. 16, 2019; Joe Biden falsely claims that he immediately opposed Iraq War , Sept. 5, 2019; Biden calls Libya a job well done , Nov. 3, 2011; Are U.S. actions in Libya subject to the War Powers Resolution? A review of the evidence , June 22, 2011 C-SPAN, User Clip: Biden's Floor Speech on Iraq War PBS.org, A Kosovo Chronology Browse the Truth-O-Meter More by Miriam Valverde Pramila Jayapal stated on August 30, 2021 in an Instagram post: “The average hospital stay for a case of COVID-19 costs about $17,064. The vaccine is free.” By Miriam Valverde • September 2, 2021 Mitt Romney stated on August 29, 2021 in a CNN interview: The Trump administration worked to free 5,000 Taliban prisoners. By Miriam Valverde • August 31, 2021 Joe Biden stated on August 20, 2021 in a press conference: There has been “no question of our credibility from our allies around the world” regarding how the U.S. is withdrawing from Afghanistan. By Miriam Valverde • August 26, 2021 Facebook posts stated on August 16, 2021 in a Facebook post: COVID-19 vaccinations are “a violation of the Nuremberg code." By Miriam Valverde • August 20, 2021 Ron DeSantis stated on August 4, 2021 in a press conference: Says Joe Biden has driven the current coronavirus surge because he “imported more virus from around the world by having a wide open southern border.” By Louis Jacobson • August 6, 2021 Ron DeSantis stated on June 16, 2021 in a press conference: “That meth … it’s almost all coming across the southern border and it’s been accelerating for the last six months.” By Miriam Valverde • June 21, 2021 Instagram posts stated on June 4, 2021 in an Instagram post: "920 women lose their unborn babies after getting vaccinated." By Miriam Valverde • June 8, 2021 Facebook posts stated on May 26, 2021 in a Facebook post: Police defunding is to blame for “skyrocketing murder rates” in Philadelphia, Minneapolis, Portland, New York City, Chicago, Los Angeles and Washington, D.C. By Miriam Valverde • May 28, 2021 Facebook posts stated on May 25, 2021 in a Facebook post: “Biden agrees to Pelosi's request to resign.” By Miriam Valverde • May 26, 2021 Facebook posts stated on May 17, 2021 in social media posts: “Gas prices highest in a decade. Worst jobs report in 2 decades. Highest inflation in 3 decades. Highest increase in illegal immigration in 4 decades.” By Louis Jacobson • May 26, 2021 Kevin McCarthy stated on May 12, 2021 in a statement to reporters: "I don't think anybody is questioning the legitimacy of the presidential election." By Miriam Valverde • May 14, 2021 Kamala Harris stated on May 4, 2021 in a speech: “The global cost of corruption is as much as 5% of the world's GDP.” By Miriam Valverde • May 7, 2021 Ron DeSantis stated on April 19, 2021 in a speech: “If you look at some of these places that (reduced police funding), they’ve already seen crime go up." By Miriam Valverde • May 4, 2021 Instagram posts stated on April 22, 2021 in an Instagram post: "Mountains of data" show drug ivermectin "basically obliterates" COVID-19 transmission. By Miriam Valverde • April 23, 2021 Facebook posts stated on April 7, 2021 in a Facebook post: Says the nation is locked down and there’s “a wide open border.” By Miriam Valverde • April 15, 2021 Fact-checking Rand Paul on Joe Biden and support for wars Clear Any Rating True Mostly True Half True Mostly False False Pants on Fire Full Flop Half Flip No Flip Any Speaker Any Date Range Last 3 Months Last 6 Months Last 12 Months 2025 2024 2023 2022 2021 2020 2019 2018 2017 2016 2015 2014 2013 2012 2011 2010 2009 2008 2007 Any Category Donald Trump stated on April 29, 2025 in an interview with ABC News: Kilmar Armando Abrego Garcia “had ‘MS-13’ on his knuckles tattooed. … He had ‘MS’ as clear as you can be. Not 'interpreted.’” By Louis Jacobson • April 30, 2025 Brian Tyler Cohen stated on April 12, 2025 in an X post: Trump “just denied North Carolina’s request for FEMA relief from Hurricane Helene.” By Paul Specht • April 24, 2025 Donald Trump stated on April 22, 2025 in remarks at the White House: “We had a couple of states where gasoline was at $1.98 a gallon.” By Louis Jacobson • April 24, 2025 Moms Demand Action for Gun Sense In America stated on April 17, 2025 in a Threads post: “Gun violence is the leading killer of college-aged people in the U.S.” By Loreben Tuquero • April 22, 2025 Michael Lawler stated on March 21, 2025 in a television interview: “If we don’t pass the tax bill by the end of the year, we will have the largest tax increase in American history.” By Jill Terreri Ramos • April 22, 2025 TikTok posts stated on April 21, 2025 in TikTok posts: “The Simpsons” predicted Pope Francis’ 2025 death. By Claire Cranford • April 22, 2025 X posts stated on April 13, 2025 in a post on X: Arizona Democrats “needed a lawsuit to force them to remove 50,000 noncitizens from voter rolls.” By Madison Czopek • April 18, 2025 Facebook posts stated on April 16, 2025 in Facebook posts: Former U.S. Rep. Liz Cheney wrote a viral letter to Democrats suggesting steps to take against the Trump administration. By Loreben Tuquero • April 18, 2025 Byron Donalds stated on April 10, 2025 in a NewsNation interview: Under the SAVE Act, “as long as you have a Real ID … it should be easy for you to register to vote.” By Grace Abels • April 18, 2025 Tim Walz stated on April 6, 2025 in an interview: “Less than half of Americans have $1,000 in savings.” By Claire Cranford • April 16, 2025 Load more Support independent fact-checking. Become a member! In a world of wild talk and fake news, help us stand up for the facts. Sign me up Offices District of Columbia 1800 I Street NW Washington, DC 20006 Florida 801 3rd St. S St. Petersburg, FL 33701 727-821-9494 People Donald Trump JD Vance Mitch McConnell Mike Johnson Joe Biden State Editions California Florida Iowa Michigan New Hampshire New York North Carolina Pennsylvania Texas West Virginia Wisconsin About Us Our Process Our Staff En Español Who pays for PolitiFact? Advertise with Us Corrections and Updates Newsletters RSS Feeds Recent Articles and Fact-checks Recent Fact-checks Suggest a Fact-check Follow us The Facts Newsletter Sign up Terms & Conditions Privacy Policy Copyright ©All Rights Reserved Poynter Institute 2020, a 501(c)(3) nonprofit organizationBiden's Record on Iraq War - FactCheck.org Facebook Twitter Tumblr Close Skip to main content FactCheck .org ® A Project of The Annenberg Public Policy Center FactCheck .org ® Home Articles FactCheck Posts SciCheck Debunking Viral Claims En Español Ask a Question Ask FactCheck Ask SciCheck Donate Topics President Trump health Coronavirus immigration climate change View All About Us Our Mission Our Process Our Funding Our Staff Undergraduate Fellows Awards Request a Correction Contact Us Search More Viral Claims Subscribe Instagram Threads YouTube X (Twitter) Facebook TikTok FactCheck On the Air Mailbag FactCheck Posts › Featured Posts Biden’s Record on Iraq War By Robert Farley Posted on September 10, 2019 1.3K 24 Twice in the last five weeks, Joe Biden has claimed that despite voting to authorize military force against Iraq in 2002, he opposed the Iraq war from “the moment” it began. That’s not accurate, and Biden now says he misspoke. The public position taken in the lead-up to and early days of the Iraq war has been a litmus test for many presidential candidates. Sen. Bernie Sanders proudly boasts about his vote — while serving as a member of the House in late 2002 — against authorizing use of military force against Iraq. While running for president, Donald Trump repeatedly claimed that he publicly opposed the Iraq war before the March 19, 2003, invasion, though we looked into it and could find no evidence that he ever did. As chairman of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee when the authorization vote was cast, Biden was at the forefront of the debate about what course to pursue with Iraq. As a result, he was also frequently quoted in the press and spoke numerous times from the Senate floor, providing ample evidence of his position over time. Biden was a consistent critic of the way the Bush administration handled the war: Its failure to exhaust diplomatic solutions, its failure to enlist a more robust group of allies for the war effort, and the lack of a plan for reconstruction of Iraq. Some of his comments proved to be quite prescient, including his warnings about the likely higher-than-expected cost and length of the war, and the complexity of “winning the peace” once Iraqi leader Saddam Hussein’s regime was toppled. But Biden never outright opposed military action in Iraq in the immediate days after the start of the invasion, as he claimed. He now admits his recent comments went too far. Biden’s Iraq Comments in 2019 During the second Democratic primary debate on July 31, Biden said his “bad judgment” in voting to authorize President George W. Bush to use military force against Iraq in 2002 was “trusting the president saying he was only doing this to get inspectors in and get the U.N. to agree to put inspectors in.” In a speech days before the 2002 vote, Bush did say approving the resolution “does not mean that military action is imminent or unavoidable,” but he also laid out in detail why military action “may” be needed. And on the day the war broke out, Biden acknowledged, “We voted to give him the authority to wage that war. We should step back and be supportive.” In the Democratic debate, Biden went on to say, “From the moment ‘shock and awe’ started, from that moment, I was opposed to the effort, and I was outspoken as much as anyone at all in the Congress and the administration.” During an interview on NPR on Sept. 3, Biden again claimed, “Immediately, the moment [shock and awe] started, I came out against the war at that moment.” Biden, Sept. 3 : I let my record stand. I think my record has been good. I think the vast majority of the foreign policy community thinks it’s been very good. For example, I got a commitment from President Bush he was not going to go to war in Iraq. He looked me in the eye in the Oval Office; he said he needed the vote to be able to get inspectors into Iraq to determine whether or not Saddam Hussein was engaged in dealing with a nuclear program. He got them in, and before we know it, we had a shock and awe. Immediately, the moment it started, I came out against the war at that moment. Now, the judgment of my trusting the president to keep his word on something like that, that was a mistake. And I apologize for that. Last month, when we reached out to the Biden campaign after Biden’s debate comment, a spokesman pointed us to comments Biden made the day before the war began and the day after. In those comments forwarded by the campaign, Biden lamented that the administration had not taken more steps toward a diplomatic solution, and warned of the need for a plan to “win the peace” after fighting ended. But Biden wasn’t against using military action against Iraq to force Iraq to give up weapons of mass destruction (which, as it turned out, it did not have). The day the war commenced, Biden told CNN : “There’s a lot of us who voted for giving the president the authority to take down Saddam Hussein if he didn’t disarm. And there are those who believe, at the end of the day, even though it wasn’t handled all that well, we still have to take him down.” During a TV interview taped for WMUR in New Hampshire on Sept. 7, Biden acknowledged that he “misspoke” in the debate and that “the misrepresentation was how quickly I said I was immediately against the war. I was against the war internally and trying to put together coalitions to try change the way in which the war was conducted.” Biden said he “argued that the way we went to war was wrong, number one. And number two, the way we were conducting the war was wrong.” The Biden campaign also provided a statement to the Washington Pos t acknowledging that “Vice President Biden misspoke by saying that he declared his opposition to the war immediately.” “He opposed the way we went to war and the way the war was being carried out,” the statement continued. “He has for many years called his vote a mistake and takes full responsibility for it. The Bush Administration assured then-Senator Biden that the purpose of the Authorization for the Use of Military Force was to strengthen our position at the U.N. Security Council to get weapons inspectors back into Iraq, and that diplomacy would be exhausted without a premature rush to war. The U.N. element of this strategy worked: after Congress passed the AUMF, the Security Council voted 15-0 to send the inspectors back and Saddam gave them access. However, the Bush Administration plunged the nation into war anyway, without allowing the inspectors to finish their job — which was profoundly misguided. Once the war began, then-Senator Biden was immediately clear in his opposition to how we got into the conflict and the way it was being conducted — including the failure to exhaust diplomacy or enlist allies, the reliance on and hyping of faulty intelligence, and the absence of a viable plan to win the peace. He was adamant that, however misguided the war, we owed it to our troops to support them, and he fought for investments like MRAPs [Mine-Resistant Ambush Protected vehicles] that saved hundreds of lives from IEDs.” Given the issue’s likely prominence in the campaign, we think it’s instructive to review some of the background and Biden’s public statements at several critical junctures. Leading Up to the Vote In a speech to the nation several days before Congress’ authorization of force vote and five months before the start of the war, the president detailed the case against Iraq, arguing that the country had violated the requirements of the truce that ended the Persian Gulf War in 1991 to “destroy its weapons of mass destruction, to cease all development of such weapons, and to stop all support for terrorist groups.” He also said Hussein was pursuing the development of nuclear weapons. All of that posed a threat to the U.S., Bush warned. “Some believe we can address this danger by simply resuming the old approach to inspections, and applying diplomatic and economic pressure,” Bush said. “Yet this is precisely what the world has tried to do since 1991.” And, he said, those methods failed. Bush, Oct. 7, 2002 : After eleven years during which we have tried containment, sanctions, inspections, even selected military action, the end result is that Saddam Hussein still has chemical and biological weapons and is increasing his capabilities to make more. And he is moving ever closer to developing a nuclear weapon. Although Bush called for new, tougher inspections and sanctions, he also made clear that war was an option. “The time for denying, deceiving, and delaying has come to an end,” Bush said. “Saddam Hussein must disarm himself — or, for the sake of peace, we will lead a coalition to disarm him.” “I hope this will not require military action, but it may,” Bush said. Biden’s Speech Prior to Vote Three days later, just prior to the vote to authorize military force, Biden gave a lengthy speech from the floor of the Senate and explained why he would vote for the resolution (beginning on S10290). Biden said he viewed the resolution not as a “rush to war,” as some of his Democratic colleagues alleged, but rather a “march to peace and security.” “I believe passage of this, with strong support, is very likely to enhance the prospects that the secretary of state will get a strong resolution out of the [United Nations] Security Council,” Biden said. Biden added that the resolution would increase the probability the U.N. would get inspectors into Iraq to do meaningful investigations of its weapons program. “I will vote for this because we should be compelling Iraq to make good on its obligations to the United Nations,” Biden said. “Because while Iraq’s illegal weapons of mass destruction program do not — do not — pose an imminent threat to our national security, in my view, they will, if left unfettered. And because a strong vote in Congress, as I said, increases the prospect for a tough, new U.N. resolution on weapons of mass destruction, it is likely to get weapons inspectors in, which, in turn, decreases the prospects of war, in my view.” Biden seized on this statement in Bush’s address to the nation: “Approving this resolution does not mean that military action is imminent or unavoidable.” Biden praised Bush for choosing, up to that point, “a course of moderation and deliberation” and noted that Bush promised that any military action would be “with allies at our side.” Biden said the resolution emphasized “the importance of international support, manifested through the United Nations Security Council.” Though Biden pushed forcefully for a wider international response, he was not opposed to military action, if necessary. “Ultimately, either those weapons must be dislodged from Iraq, or Saddam must be dislodged from power,” Biden said. It’s true, as Biden has said recently, that he saw the resolution as a means to compel Iraq to allow weapons inspectors back in. Biden, Oct. 10, 2002 : Concerning Iraq, our first step should be the one the president apparently has chosen: to get the weapons inspectors back into Iraq. … I agree with President Bush that given a new mandate and the authority to go any place, any time, with no advance warning, U.N. inspections can work. They can succeed in discovering and destroying much of Saddam’s chemical and biological arsenals and his missile program. They can delay and derail his efforts to acquire nuclear weapons and, at the very least, they will give us a clearer picture of what Saddam has, force him to focus on hiding his weapons and not building more, and it will buy us time to build a strong coalition to act if he refuses to disarm. Biden argued the resolution “would finally force Saddam to face the choice between inspectors and invaders … and there is at least a chance that he might make the right choice.” Biden also warned that the cost of a war would be much higher than most Americans believed, and that reconstruction of Iraq would be difficult, costly and likely take a decade — comments that seem prescient given how events unfolded. But again, Biden said he was not opposed to military action if diplomacy failed. “There is also a chance Saddam will once again miscalculate, that he will misjudge our resolve, and in that event we must be prepared to use force with others if we can, and alone if we must,” Biden said. The resolution passed the House 296-133 on Oct. 10, 2002. It passed the Senate the following day 77-33. U.N. Action On Nov. 8, 2002, the U.N. Security Council unanimously passed Resolution 1441, which stated that Iraq was “in material breach of its obligations” regarding its disarmament agreements following the Persian Gulf War, and accused Iraq of failing to cooperate with U.N. weapons inspectors and the International Atomic Energy Agency. The resolution offered Hussein “a final opportunity to comply with [Iraq’s] disarmament obligations” and set up “an enhanced inspection regime with the aim of bringing to full and verified completion the disarmament process.” The resolution gave Iraq 30 days to provide a complete declaration of “all aspects of its programmes to develop chemical, biological, and nuclear weapons, ballistic missiles, and other delivery systems.” Biden hailed the move as “an important victory for American diplomacy,” and he praised Bush for “forging an international consensus on Saddam’s obligation to disarm.” “By going through the United Nations, we have gained critical international support if it becomes necessary to use force to disarm Saddam,” Biden said. In early 2003, the Bush administration began pushing for a second U.N. resolution setting a deadline for Hussein and authorizing military force if necessary to get Hussein to disarm. But the resolution was met with resistance from several key members, including France, Germany, Russia and China. In a speech before the U.N. on Feb. 5, 2003, then-Secretary of State Colin Powell said, “The facts on Iraqis’ behavior … demonstrate that Saddam Hussein and his regime have made no effort — no effort — to disarm as required by the international community. Indeed, the facts on … Iraq’s behavior show that Saddam Hussein and his regime are concealing their efforts to produce more weapons of mass destruction.” He then laid out the case for that assertion based on U.S. intelligence. In an interview hours after Powell’s speech, Biden appeared on CNN and was asked, “Did Secretary of State Powell today close the deal in your mind to those who at least have an open mind about the situation in Iraq?” “Absolutely,” Biden said. “He made a compelling case. The predominance of the evidence, the pure weight of the evidence, I think anyone. … Let me put it this way, if I were back practicing law I can’t imagine I could not convince an open-minded jury of the facts that he presented as having been true.” Biden insisted, however, that “we may be a step closer to peace. … The ball, as they say, is in Saddam’s court. … The security council’s on the line here. They’re either going to prove they are relevant or irrelevant, because I don’t think any open-minded person could argue that Saddam is not in material breach of the U.N. resolution 1441.” Biden argued in a Washington Post op-ed on March 10, 2003, that the U.S. ought to seek a second U.N. resolution giving Iraq “ more time for Iraq to meet specific disarmament demands ” but also getting a commitment from the U.N. to use force if Iraq failed to meet deadlines. Bush ultimately made the decision to go to war with Iraq, which began with the “shock and awe” bombing attack on March 19, 2003 . The U.S. was backed with troops from just four other countries: Australia, Denmark, Poland and the United Kingdom. Bush announced that the “ major military combat actions” in Iraq — officially dubbed Operation Iraqi Freedom — ended on May 1, 2003. The Days Just Before and After Invasion In the hours before bombing began, Biden appeared on CNN and again warned that a large international group would be needed to successfully navigate, and help pay for, the rebuilding of Iraq once the fighting stopped. “And so that’s why I hope we begin a new round of diplomacy on, what [happens] after Saddam. Who is going to be in there with us?” Biden said. Biden was asked about comments made by fellow Democratic Sen. Tom Daschle two days prior that he was “[s] addened that we have to give up one life because this president couldn’t create the kind of diplomatic effort that was so critical for our country.” “There’s a lot of us who voted for giving the president the authority to take down Saddam Hussein if he didn’t disarm,” Biden said. “And there are those who believe, at the end of the day, even though it wasn’t handled all that well, we still have to take him down. But what you are sensing from some Democrats, as well as Republicans, is a frustration relating to the lost opportunities of maybe being able to do this with others, maybe, if we had others with us, not even having to go to war. So I don’t think it’s anything other than a frustration. “But I think it’s time we stop all that,” Biden said. “We have one single focus. And that is, we’re about to send our women and men to war. The president is the commander in chief. We voted to give him the authority to wage that war. We should step back and be supportive.” On April 2, 2003, Biden was again asked in a CNN interview about Daschle’s comments critical of Bush’s diplomatic efforts. This time, Biden said he “disagreed” with Daschle, who, like Biden, voted in favor of the authorization of force. “The way the Constitution works is, we voted to give the president the authority to go to war,” Biden said. “It’s our decision whether or not we go from a state of peace to a state of war. We gave him that authority. You can second guess whether we should have or not. Once we’ve [done] that then it’s his decision to prosecute the war. I wish he had been more successful and more earnest [in] his diplomacy. And my prayer now is … that he’ll be more successful in diplomacy of how to win the peace. But as the conduct of the war goes, that’s his call.” In an interview with Charlie Rose on March 20, 2003, the day after the start of the war, Rose asked about Biden’s comment that the war was the biggest roll of the dice by a president he had seen during his 30 years in the Senate. Biden said that comment referred to “the willingness to go without any real consensus in the world community.” Rose then asked if there was “a payoff at the end that justifies the risk” of war with Iraq. “I think there’s a payoff at the end and that is Saddam Hussein being separated from weapons of mass destruction and enforcing a U.N. commitment made by Saddam about those weapons,” Biden said. Later, Rose asked, “If in fact the war goes well, in however you define that … would you then say that George Bush made a wise decision in rolling the dice to disarm Saddam Hussein?” “I all along, Charlie, believed the right decision is to separate him from his weapons and/or separate him from power,” Biden said. “If the U.N. didn’t do it, do it?” Rose interjected. “Yes, you’ve gotta do it,” Biden said. “Now, it’s not the time to argue it, but I am disturbed at the lost opportunities we had to bring the rest of the world along with us to this point. … And now the question is … can you make lemonade out of lemons here? And I think we have an opportunity in the aftermath of this war to repair those kinds of breaches and end up where we should be anyway, which is having made the right decision to take him down, and having not fractured in any permanent way alliances and opportunities that we’re going to need available to us, Charlie, to deal with other major problems facing us in the world, from the Korean peninsula to South Asia, to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict.” Biden continued to make similar comments in the months after the war started. For example, in a Brookings Institution address on July 31, 2003, Biden again defended his vote to authorize the use of military force in Iraq. The Bush administration was “ right to confront the challenge posed by Saddam thumbing his nose at the world and refusing — refusing — to alter his conduct,” Biden said . “ Contrary to what some in my party might think, Iraq was a problem that had to be dealt with sooner, rather than later. So I commend the president. He was right to enforce the solemn commitments made by Saddam. If they were not enforced … what good would they be and what value those institutions? For me, the issue was never whether we had to deal with Saddam, but when and how we dealt with Saddam. And it’s precisely the when and how that I think this administration got wrong. We went to war too soon. We went to war with too few troops. We went to war without the world, when we could have had many with us, and we’re paying the price for it now.” It wasn’t until Nov. 27, 2005, that Biden acknowledged on NBC’s “Meet the Press” that his 2002 vote authorizing force in Iraq was “a mistake.” “ It was a mistake,” Biden said. “It was a mistake to assume the president would use the authority we gave him properly. … We gave the president the authority to unite the world to isolate Saddam. And the fact of the matter is, we went too soon. We went without sufficient force. And we went without a plan .” Categories FactCheck Posts Featured Posts Tags 2020 Election Location International Issue authorizing force in Iraq Iraq war People Joe Biden Previous Story Buttigieg Wrong About Climate Change’s Effect on Oceans Next Story Meme Misleads on Walmart Gun Sales Ask FactCheck Q: Is it true the rumor that all Social Security beneficiaries will have to go to a location to verify their identity to receive their monthly check? A: The Social Security Administration had announced new policies on identity verification that would have required those applying for retirement and survivor benefits for the first time to verify their identity either online or in person at a field office. Phone verification wasn’t going to be an option any longer. However, the SSA canceled that policy days before it was to take effect. Direct deposit changes can only be done online or in person. Read the full question and answer View the Ask FactCheck archives Have a question? Ask us. Donate Now Because facts matter. SciCheck's COVID-19/Vaccination Project Preempting and exposing vaccination and COVID-19 misinformation. Proyecto de Vacunación/COVID-19 Precaviendo y exponiendo la desinformación sobre el COVID-19 y sus vacunas SciCheck Fact-checking science-based claims. Facebook Initiative Debunking viral claims. Players Guide 2024 The special interest groups behind the TV ads. Viral Spiral Don’t get spun by internet rumors. Sign Up Get free email alerts. Mailbag Letters from our readers. On the Air Our staff on TV and radio. NewsFeed Defenders A media literacy game to detect misinformation. Archives Privacy Copyright Policy Contact Us Report Accessibility Issues and Get Help © Copyright 2025 FactCheck.org ® A Project of The Annenberg Public Policy Center of the University of PennsylvaniaAG Bondi gets extended deadline to recommend killing gun control policies: DOJ - ABC News ABC News Video Live Shows Shop Stream on AG Bondi gets extended deadline to recommend killing gun control policies: DOJ President Donald Trump signed the executive order on Feb. 7. By Bill Hutchinson March 14, 2025, 8:19 AM 1:33 Attorney General Pam Bondi walks to the West Wing of the White House, Feb. 21, 2025, in Washington. Will Oliver/EPA-EFE/Shutterstock The deadline quietly passed on Attorney General Pam Bondi delivering a report to President Donald Trump on whether any leftover Biden administration policies infringe on Americans' right to bear arms . It came just days after Democratic leaders sent her a letter suggesting there is "plainly no need for any new plan of action." Trump signed an executive order on Feb. 7 after making campaign promises to gun-rights groups like the National Rifle Association (NRA) that "no one will lay a finger on your firearms." The president instructed Bondi to "examine all orders, regulations, guidance, plans, international agreements, and other actions of executive departments and agencies" and determine if any of them violate the Second Amendment. "The Second Amendment is an indispensable safeguard of security and liberty. It has preserved the right of the American people to protect ourselves, our families, and our freedoms since the founding of our great Nation," Trump's executive order reads. "Because it is foundational to maintaining all other rights held by Americans, the right to keep and bear arms must not be infringed." Attorney General Pam Bondi walks to the West Wing of the White House, Feb. 21, 2025, in Washington. Alex Brandon/AP The 30-day mark for Bondi to report back to Trump through his domestic policy director would have been this past Sunday, March 9. On Thursday, a Department of Justice official confirmed to ABC News that the deadline had been extended to Sunday, March 16. The White House did not respond to ABC News' inquiry about Bondi's pending report. Andrew Willinger, executive director of the Center for Firearms Law at Duke University School of Law, told ABC News the broadly written executive order "signals to me that this isn't a top priority" for the Trump administration. “Obviously, if there were things that were on the administration's radar as possibly violating the Second Amendment or violating the rights of gun owners in some way, they could have started to roll those back right away and wouldn’t have needed to take this intermediate step of issuing a directive to the Attorney General to figure out what those were," Willinger said. "That suggests that there’s nothing out there that the administration viewed as so pressing that they have to get rid of it right away." 'Perfectly consistent with the 2nd Amendment' After Trump signed the executive order, NRA Executive Vice President Doug Hamlin released a statement praising the president's move. "Promises made to law-abiding gun owners are being kept by President Donald J. Trump," Hamlin said. "NRA members were instrumental, turning out in record numbers to secure his victory, and he is proving worthy of their votes, faith and confidence in his first days in office." John Commerford, executive director of the NRA Institute for Legislative Action, also released a statement, saying, "After a long four years, law-abiding gun owners no longer have to worry about being the target of an anti-gun radical administration. NRA looks forward to the advances and restoration of our rights that will come from President Trump's respect for the Constitution." President Donald Trump sits at his desk in the Oval Office of the White House in Washington, Mar. 7, 2025. Leah Millis/Reuters Earlier this month, Rep. Jamie Raskin, D-Maryland, ranking member of the House Judiciary Committee, and Rep. Lucy McBath, D-Georgia, ranking member of the House subcommittee on Crime and Federal Government Surveillance, sent Bondi a letter. "We are determined to protect our communities against lethal gun crime in a manner consistent with the Second Amendment," they wrote. The letter said that if Bondi carried out her examination "objectively and in good faith" she'll find that actions taken by the previous administration to fight gun violence are "perfectly consistent with the Second Amendment." "There is plainly no need for any new plan of action to, in the words of the executive order, 'protect the Second Amendment rights of all Americans,'" the letter said. In his executive order, Trump instructed Bondi that in addition to reviewing all presidential actions taken on gun control from January 2021 to January 2025, he wanted her to review rules about firearms and federal firearm licensing implemented by the Department of Justice and the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms, and Explosives (ATF). Trump specifically asked Bondi to review the ATF's "enhanced regulatory enforcement policy" -- also called the "zero tolerance policy" -- implemented in 2021 under Biden and former Attorney General Merrick Garland to identify federal firearms dealers who violate the 1968 Gun Control Act. MORE: Federal appeals court strikes down ban on handgun sales to teens Under the policy, firearms dealers had their licenses revoked for willfully transferring firearms to prohibited people, failing to conduct the required background checks, falsifying records and failing to respond to a gun trace request. The policy prompted several lawsuits from gun dealers who argued their licenses were revoked over minor clerical errors. Raskin and McBath claimed that in the three years since the policy was implemented, about 0.3% of the nation's roughly 130,000 federal gun dealers had their licenses revoked. U.S. Rep. Jamie Raskin (D-MD) speaks at a rally outside of the Department of Health and Human Services, February 19, 2025, in Washington. Kayla Bartkowski/Getty Images "Through this policy, ATF has enforced the Gun Control Act as passed by Congress and had revoked the licenses of a tiny fraction of gun dealers who willfully violated the law," Raskin and McBath said in their letter to Bondi. "The ATF's enhanced regulatory policy has not prevented a single American who may lawfully possess a firearm from exercising his or her Second Amendment rights." The ATF reported that in fiscal year 2023, the agency found 1,531 violations after conducting 8,689 firearm compliance inspections. The inspections, according to the ATF, prompted 667 warning letters and 170 revocations. "Law-abiding gun dealers remain in business throughout the country. In fact, there remain more gun dealers than there are locations of Starbucks, McDonald's, Dunkin' Donuts, Burger King, Subway, and Chick-fil-A combined," Raskin and McBath said in their letter. MORE: Crackdown on do-it-yourself firearm kits is curbing ghost guns. Will it last? The Democratic lawmakers asked Bondi to respond to their letter by the end of the business day on Monday, explaining what standards she will use to determine if policies taken by the Biden administration violate the Second Amendment and how she will ensure her plan of action "does not increase the risk of violent crime, including gun deaths." Majority of Americans favor stronger gun laws A Pew Research Center poll released in July 2024 found that 61% of respondents agreed that it is too easy to legally obtain a gun and 58% favored stricter gun laws. "We know that the vast majority of Americans -- including gun owners and Trump voters -- support basic safety laws that crack down on crime and keep all communities safe. These policies are in no way inconsistent with the Second Amendment," Kris Brown, president of the gun-safety advocacy group Brady United, said in a statement after Trump signed the executive order. Brown noted that policies under Biden included expanding background checks for gun buyers and "cracking down on rogue gun traffickers." "They must be continued if this President actually wants to achieve any of his campaign promises around reducing crime, cracking down on drug traffickers, and reducing the flow of trafficked weapons across the southern border," Brown said. In the aftermath of the 2022 mass shooting at Robb Elementary School in Uvalde, Texas, that claimed the lives of 19 children and two teachers, Biden signed the Bipartisan Safer Communities Act , the first major piece of federal gun reform to clear both chambers in 30 years. MORE: 'I feel terrified': Inventor of 'Glock switch' technology says he regrets creation The law enhanced background checks for gun buyers under the age of 21 by giving authorities up to 10 business days to review the juvenile and mental health records of young gun purchasers, and made it unlawful for someone to purchase a gun for someone who would fail a background check. This legislation closed the so-called "boyfriend loophole" preventing individuals convicted of domestic abuse from purchasing a gun. The law included $750 million to help states implement "red flag" laws to remove firearms from people deemed to be a danger to themselves or others, as well as other violence prevention programs. It also provided funding for a variety of programs aimed at shoring up the nation's mental health apparatus and securing schools. Willinger told ABC News that "short of asking Congress to appeal it," there is little the Trump administration can do about the law. "It’s possible that the administration could do stuff to hold up that money," Willinger said. "I don’t know what wiggle room they have to do that." Editor's note: An earlier version of the story indicated that the deadline had passed. A Department of Justice official informed ABC News of the extension after it was published after multiple attempts to get comment. Related Topics President Biden President Trump Sponsored Content by Taboola Popular Reads Catholic community reacts to Trump's fake image of himself as pope May 5, 2:29 PM Trump calls for famed Alcatraz prison to be reopened May 5, 2:53 AM 5 charged in 'human smuggling operation' after boat incident leaves 3 dead 4 hours ago Trump admin live updates: Trump says Houthis have 'capitulated' to US May 6, 5:25 PM ABC News Live 24/7 coverage of breaking news and live events ABC News Network Privacy Policy Your US State Privacy Rights Children's Online Privacy Policy Interest-Based Ads About Nielsen Measurement Terms of Use Do Not Sell or Share My Personal Information Contact Us © 2025 ABC NewsKenya’s ex-prime minister Odinga mangles his numbers on government revenue share in Nigeria - Africa Check Skip to main content English Français Main navigation Fact-checks Reports Factsheets Guides Spot Checks Blog Meta programme fact-checks Republish our work Who we are Our team Our impact How we are funded Partners Get in touch What we do Info Finder African Fact-Checking Awards Corrections Fact-checking research Training Media Literacy Educator knowledge hub How we fact-check Corrections policy Code of principles How we rate claims Get Involved Donate Submit a claim to fact-check Partner with us Join our team Fact-checking tips Quizzes Donate Back to Africa Check Kenya’s ex-prime minister Odinga mangles his numbers on government revenue share in Nigeria Published on 23 September 2020 Claim Three claims about how revenue is shared between Nigeria’s three levels of government. Verdict One correct, two incorrect Source Kenya’s former prime minister Raila Odinga (August 2020) This article is more than 4 years old Since 2004 Nigeria’s revenue sharing formula has given 52.68% to the federal government, 26.72% to states and 20.60% to local governments. Odinga was correct about local governments’ share, but wide of the mark for the other two government levels. And experts question his claim that Nigeria’s system “works perfectly well”. After months of an often fractious stalemate , in September 2020 Kenya’s senate hammered out a deal on how revenue would be shared between the country’s two levels of government. In August, at the height of the deadlock, former prime minister Odinga returned to a familiar talking point to argue for establishing a third tier of government. Building on this in an interview with Citizen TV , Odinga, who is also an African Union envoy , said Kenya could solve the recurring battle over how to share revenue if it looked to Nigeria for lessons. Nigeria, he said, had a local, state and federal system of government. “In terms of revenue share, 20% of the revenue goes to the local, 35% goes to the state and 45% goes to the federal governments ... and it works perfectly well,” Odinga said . We checked if he was on the mark about how revenue is shared in Africa’s largest economy . Claim In Nigeria … in terms of revenue share, 20% goes to the local government. Verdict correct We asked Dennis Onyango, Odinga’s spokesperson, for the source of the former leader’s claims. We will update this report with his response. In line with its constitution , Nigeria has a federal capital authority, 36 states and 768 local government authorities. There are also six area councils. The Revenue Mobilisation, Allocation and Fiscal Commission proposes a formula for how revenue is to be shared between the three levels. This is then approved by the national assembly . The revenue formula was first used in 1982 when the Nigeria Revenue Allocation Act came into effect. The law stipulated that 56% of funds would go to the federal government, 24% to states and 20% to local governments. The current formula can be traced to a March 2004 circular from the finance ministry. It has remained at these levels since. “The revenue allocation formula is still 52.68%, 26.72% and 20.6%,” Prof Sherifdeen Tella, professor of economics at Olabisi Onabanjo University told Africa Check. Before the revenue is split an amount “not less than 13%” is deducted and shared among the oil producing states based on their production levels. According to data from Nigeria's extractive industries transparency initiative , a government agency supervised by the president’s office, local governments get 20.6% of national revenue. We therefore rate Odinga as correct on this claim. Recent local government allocations at 20% The most recent full year data from the budget office shows that in 2019, local governments received N1.04 trillion of the N5.05 trillion available for sharing among the three levels of government. And in the first quarter of 2020, local governments got N441.44 billion of the N2.14 trillion available. Both these amounts work out to about 20% for local governments. (Note: Value-added tax is also shared among the three levels of government, using a different formula. Local governments get 35% of VAT revenue, state governments 50% and the federal government 15%.) Claim 35% of revenue goes to states. Verdict incorrect Data from Nigeria's extractive industries transparency initiative shows that 26.72% is reserved for the state governments, not the 35% Odinga claimed. We therefore rate this claim as incorrect. In 2019, of the N5.05 trillion available for sharing, states got N1.35 trillion. In the first quarter of 2020, states received N572.59 billion of the N2.14 trillion available. Both these allocations work out to 26.72%, in keeping with the formula. Claim 45% of revenue goes to the federal governments. Verdict incorrect Odinga’s claim of 45% is not accurate. Official data shows the federal government gets more than half of the total revenue. In 2019, data from the budget office shows the federal government received N2.66 trillion of the N5.05 trillion available for sharing. In the first quarter of 2020 it got N1.13 trillion out of N2.14 trillion. These amounts tally with the 52.68% set out in the sharing formula. Does Nigeria’s revenue sharing model work ‘perfectly well’? Raila Odinga’s assertion that the Nigerian revenue sharing formula “works perfectly” is contested. Gazie Okpara , a professor of marketing at Abia State University in southeast Nigeria whose interests include social policy, said the formula was imperfect because how the funds were spent was not transparent. “Each level of government should always give an account of how funds were spent,” he said, an audit that should be provided for in the constitution. Prof Sherifdeen Tella, a professor of economics at Olabisi Onabanjo University in southwestern Nigeria, told Africa Check that in his view, allocations to state and local governments, and especially the former, should be increased. “What is allocated to these two tiers of government is not sufficient.” Matthew Akintayo is a professor at the University of Ibadan , also in southwestern Nigeria. One of his focus areas is the economics of education. He told Africa Check that the sharing formula should be restructured. “A bulk or vast fraction of resources should be allocated to the state and local government because both arms of government are closer to the grassroots,” he said. He added that state governors should be given more leeway to manage their resources. John Kinuthia, a senior programme officer at the International Budget Partnership , told Africa Check that Odinga should also have considered the nature of devolved functions when drawing comparisons. It was difficult to compare Kenyan counties with Nigerian states, partly because they had different functions, Kinuthia said. He gave the example of education. “In Nigeria there are functions like education that are devolved, which is why you see a bigger proportion of resources at the subnational level compared to Kenya. In Kenya, education is still at the national level.” Republish our content for free We believe that everyone needs the facts. You can republish the text of this article free of charge, both online and in print. However, we ask that you pay attention to these simple guidelines . In a nutshell: 1. Do not include images, as in most cases we do not own the copyright. 2. Please do not edit the article. 3. Make sure you credit "Africa Check" in the byline and don't forget to mention that the article was originally published on africacheck.org . Name Surname Email Leave this field blank Vincent Ng’ethe in Nairobi and Motunrayo Joel in Lagos Claim Three claims about how revenue is shared between Nigeria’s three levels of government. Verdict One correct, two incorrect Source Kenya’s former prime minister Raila Odinga (August 2020) Join us on WhatsApp Further Reading false Nigeria Biafra Nnamdi Kanu arrest government No evidence Biafran pro-independence leader Nnamdi Kanu's wife and son arrested by Nigerian government scam Kenya government free online courses online scam No, Kenyan government not offering free online courses to all adults Kenya Economy William Ruto diaspora remittance revenue GDP #RutoRecordReport Precision or spin? Evaluating Kenyan president Ruto’s mid-term economic scorecard Add new comment Your name Comment About text formats Restricted HTML Allowed HTML tags: <a href hreflang> <em> <strong> <cite> <blockquote cite> <code> <ul type> <ol start type> <li> <dl> <dt> <dd> <h2 id> <h3 id> <h4 id> <h5 id> <h6 id> Lines and paragraphs break automatically. Web page addresses and email addresses turn into links automatically. limit: 600 characters Leave this field blank Sign up to our newsletter Name Africa Check values your trust and is committed to the responsible management, use and protection of personal information. See our privacy policy. Leave this field blank Spot Checks View All false Nigeria Biafra Nnamdi Kanu arrest government No evidence Biafran pro-independence leader Nnamdi Kanu's wife and son arrested by Nigerian government scam Kenya government free online courses online scam No, Kenyan government not offering free online courses to all adults Kenya Economy William Ruto diaspora remittance revenue GDP #RutoRecordReport Precision or spin? Evaluating Kenyan president Ruto’s mid-term economic scorecard We hold public figures accountable For democracy to function, public figures need to be held to account for what they say. The claims they make need to be checked, openly and impartially. Africa Check is an independent, non-partisan organisation which assesses claims made in the public arena using journalistic skills and evidence drawn from the latest online tools, readers, public sources and experts, sorting fact from fiction and publishing the results. Browse by category Health Covid-19 Education Crime Economy Kenya Nigeria Senegal South Africa Sign up to our newsletter Name Africa Check values your trust and is committed to the responsible management, use and protection of personal information. See our privacy policy. Leave this field blank Follow us Facebook Twitter Instagram TikTok Footer About Partner With Us Terms and Conditions Contact Us Sitemap Want to keep reading our fact-checks? We will never charge you for verified, reliable information. Help us keep it that way by supporting our work. Become a newsletter subscriber Name Africa Check values your trust and is committed to the responsible management, use and protection of personal information. See our privacy policy. Leave this field blank Support independent fact-checking in Africa. See our donation optionsKenya’s ex-prime minister Odinga mangles his numbers on government revenue share in Nigeria - Africa Check Skip to main content English Français Main navigation Fact-checks Reports Factsheets Guides Spot Checks Blog Meta programme fact-checks Republish our work Who we are Our team Our impact How we are funded Partners Get in touch What we do Info Finder African Fact-Checking Awards Corrections Fact-checking research Training Media Literacy Educator knowledge hub How we fact-check Corrections policy Code of principles How we rate claims Get Involved Donate Submit a claim to fact-check Partner with us Join our team Fact-checking tips Quizzes Donate Back to Africa Check Kenya’s ex-prime minister Odinga mangles his numbers on government revenue share in Nigeria Published on 23 September 2020 Claim Three claims about how revenue is shared between Nigeria’s three levels of government. Verdict One correct, two incorrect Source Kenya’s former prime minister Raila Odinga (August 2020) This article is more than 4 years old Since 2004 Nigeria’s revenue sharing formula has given 52.68% to the federal government, 26.72% to states and 20.60% to local governments. Odinga was correct about local governments’ share, but wide of the mark for the other two government levels. And experts question his claim that Nigeria’s system “works perfectly well”. After months of an often fractious stalemate , in September 2020 Kenya’s senate hammered out a deal on how revenue would be shared between the country’s two levels of government. In August, at the height of the deadlock, former prime minister Odinga returned to a familiar talking point to argue for establishing a third tier of government. Building on this in an interview with Citizen TV , Odinga, who is also an African Union envoy , said Kenya could solve the recurring battle over how to share revenue if it looked to Nigeria for lessons. Nigeria, he said, had a local, state and federal system of government. “In terms of revenue share, 20% of the revenue goes to the local, 35% goes to the state and 45% goes to the federal governments ... and it works perfectly well,” Odinga said . We checked if he was on the mark about how revenue is shared in Africa’s largest economy . Claim In Nigeria … in terms of revenue share, 20% goes to the local government. Verdict correct We asked Dennis Onyango, Odinga’s spokesperson, for the source of the former leader’s claims. We will update this report with his response. In line with its constitution , Nigeria has a federal capital authority, 36 states and 768 local government authorities. There are also six area councils. The Revenue Mobilisation, Allocation and Fiscal Commission proposes a formula for how revenue is to be shared between the three levels. This is then approved by the national assembly . The revenue formula was first used in 1982 when the Nigeria Revenue Allocation Act came into effect. The law stipulated that 56% of funds would go to the federal government, 24% to states and 20% to local governments. The current formula can be traced to a March 2004 circular from the finance ministry. It has remained at these levels since. “The revenue allocation formula is still 52.68%, 26.72% and 20.6%,” Prof Sherifdeen Tella, professor of economics at Olabisi Onabanjo University told Africa Check. Before the revenue is split an amount “not less than 13%” is deducted and shared among the oil producing states based on their production levels. According to data from Nigeria's extractive industries transparency initiative , a government agency supervised by the president’s office, local governments get 20.6% of national revenue. We therefore rate Odinga as correct on this claim. Recent local government allocations at 20% The most recent full year data from the budget office shows that in 2019, local governments received N1.04 trillion of the N5.05 trillion available for sharing among the three levels of government. And in the first quarter of 2020, local governments got N441.44 billion of the N2.14 trillion available. Both these amounts work out to about 20% for local governments. (Note: Value-added tax is also shared among the three levels of government, using a different formula. Local governments get 35% of VAT revenue, state governments 50% and the federal government 15%.) Claim 35% of revenue goes to states. Verdict incorrect Data from Nigeria's extractive industries transparency initiative shows that 26.72% is reserved for the state governments, not the 35% Odinga claimed. We therefore rate this claim as incorrect. In 2019, of the N5.05 trillion available for sharing, states got N1.35 trillion. In the first quarter of 2020, states received N572.59 billion of the N2.14 trillion available. Both these allocations work out to 26.72%, in keeping with the formula. Claim 45% of revenue goes to the federal governments. Verdict incorrect Odinga’s claim of 45% is not accurate. Official data shows the federal government gets more than half of the total revenue. In 2019, data from the budget office shows the federal government received N2.66 trillion of the N5.05 trillion available for sharing. In the first quarter of 2020 it got N1.13 trillion out of N2.14 trillion. These amounts tally with the 52.68% set out in the sharing formula. Does Nigeria’s revenue sharing model work ‘perfectly well’? Raila Odinga’s assertion that the Nigerian revenue sharing formula “works perfectly” is contested. Gazie Okpara , a professor of marketing at Abia State University in southeast Nigeria whose interests include social policy, said the formula was imperfect because how the funds were spent was not transparent. “Each level of government should always give an account of how funds were spent,” he said, an audit that should be provided for in the constitution. Prof Sherifdeen Tella, a professor of economics at Olabisi Onabanjo University in southwestern Nigeria, told Africa Check that in his view, allocations to state and local governments, and especially the former, should be increased. “What is allocated to these two tiers of government is not sufficient.” Matthew Akintayo is a professor at the University of Ibadan , also in southwestern Nigeria. One of his focus areas is the economics of education. He told Africa Check that the sharing formula should be restructured. “A bulk or vast fraction of resources should be allocated to the state and local government because both arms of government are closer to the grassroots,” he said. He added that state governors should be given more leeway to manage their resources. John Kinuthia, a senior programme officer at the International Budget Partnership , told Africa Check that Odinga should also have considered the nature of devolved functions when drawing comparisons. It was difficult to compare Kenyan counties with Nigerian states, partly because they had different functions, Kinuthia said. He gave the example of education. “In Nigeria there are functions like education that are devolved, which is why you see a bigger proportion of resources at the subnational level compared to Kenya. In Kenya, education is still at the national level.” Republish our content for free We believe that everyone needs the facts. You can republish the text of this article free of charge, both online and in print. However, we ask that you pay attention to these simple guidelines . In a nutshell: 1. Do not include images, as in most cases we do not own the copyright. 2. Please do not edit the article. 3. Make sure you credit "Africa Check" in the byline and don't forget to mention that the article was originally published on africacheck.org . Name Surname Email Leave this field blank Vincent Ng’ethe in Nairobi and Motunrayo Joel in Lagos Claim Three claims about how revenue is shared between Nigeria’s three levels of government. Verdict One correct, two incorrect Source Kenya’s former prime minister Raila Odinga (August 2020) Join us on WhatsApp Further Reading false Nigeria Biafra Nnamdi Kanu arrest government No evidence Biafran pro-independence leader Nnamdi Kanu's wife and son arrested by Nigerian government scam Kenya government free online courses online scam No, Kenyan government not offering free online courses to all adults Kenya Economy William Ruto diaspora remittance revenue GDP #RutoRecordReport Precision or spin? Evaluating Kenyan president Ruto’s mid-term economic scorecard Add new comment Your name Comment About text formats Restricted HTML Allowed HTML tags: <a href hreflang> <em> <strong> <cite> <blockquote cite> <code> <ul type> <ol start type> <li> <dl> <dt> <dd> <h2 id> <h3 id> <h4 id> <h5 id> <h6 id> Lines and paragraphs break automatically. Web page addresses and email addresses turn into links automatically. limit: 600 characters Leave this field blank Sign up to our newsletter Name Africa Check values your trust and is committed to the responsible management, use and protection of personal information. See our privacy policy. Leave this field blank Spot Checks View All false Nigeria Biafra Nnamdi Kanu arrest government No evidence Biafran pro-independence leader Nnamdi Kanu's wife and son arrested by Nigerian government scam Kenya government free online courses online scam No, Kenyan government not offering free online courses to all adults Kenya Economy William Ruto diaspora remittance revenue GDP #RutoRecordReport Precision or spin? Evaluating Kenyan president Ruto’s mid-term economic scorecard We hold public figures accountable For democracy to function, public figures need to be held to account for what they say. The claims they make need to be checked, openly and impartially. Africa Check is an independent, non-partisan organisation which assesses claims made in the public arena using journalistic skills and evidence drawn from the latest online tools, readers, public sources and experts, sorting fact from fiction and publishing the results. Browse by category Health Covid-19 Education Crime Economy Kenya Nigeria Senegal South Africa Sign up to our newsletter Name Africa Check values your trust and is committed to the responsible management, use and protection of personal information. See our privacy policy. Leave this field blank Follow us Facebook Twitter Instagram TikTok Footer About Partner With Us Terms and Conditions Contact Us Sitemap Want to keep reading our fact-checks? We will never charge you for verified, reliable information. Help us keep it that way by supporting our work. Become a newsletter subscriber Name Africa Check values your trust and is committed to the responsible management, use and protection of personal information. See our privacy policy. Leave this field blank Support independent fact-checking in Africa. See our donation optionsData show Trump didn't 'build' a great economy. He inherited it. IE 11 is not supported. For an optimal experience visit our site on another browser. Skip to Content NBC News Logo India-Pakistan Conclave Politics U.S. News Local New York Los Angeles Chicago Dallas-Fort Worth Philadelphia Washington, D.C. Boston Bay Area South Florida San Diego Connecticut World Sports Business Health Shopping Tipline Science Culture & Trends Share & Save — My News Manage Profile Email Preferences Sign Out Search Search Profile My News Sign Out Sign In Create your free profile Sections U.S. News Decision 2024 Politics World Business Sports Investigations Culture & Trends Health Science Tech Weather Video Features Photos NBC Select NBC Asian America NBC BLK NBC Latino NBC OUT Local New York Los Angeles Chicago Dallas-Fort Worth Philadelphia Washington, D.C. Boston Bay Area South Florida San Diego Connecticut tv Today Nightly News MSNBC Meet the Press Dateline Featured NBC News Now Nightly Films Stay Tuned Special Features Newsletters Podcasts Listen Now More From NBC CNBC NBC.COM NBCU Academy Peacock NEXT STEPS FOR VETS NBC News Site Map Help Follow NBC News news Alerts There are no new alerts at this time Search Search Facebook Twitter Email SMS Print Whatsapp Reddit Pocket Flipboard Pinterest Linkedin Latest Stories India-Pakistan Conclave Politics U.S. News World Sports Business Health Shopping Tipline Science Culture & Trends Meet the Press Data show Trump didn't 'build' a great economy. He inherited it. The average quarterly economic growth under Trump, 2.5 percent, was almost exactly what it was under Obama in the second term, 2.4 percent. Get more news Live on By Dante Chinni WASHINGTON — President Donald Trump’s campaign speeches can careen into many topics, but his primary appeal continues to be that he built “the greatest economy that we've had in our history” before the COVID-19 pandemic and he can do it again. The latest NBC News/Wall Street Journal poll shows he has an edge with voters on that issue and the Trump economy is likely to be a big topic this week at the Republican convention. But the real story of the Trump economy, and the president’s role in building it, is not so simple. If you compare key economic indicators from Barack Obama’s second term in office to the first three years of Trump’s time (that is, before the pandemic hit), the data show a continuation of trends, not a dramatic shift. It suggests Trump didn’t build something new; rather he inherited a pretty good situation. Start with the broadest measure of economic health, gross domestic product. In 2016, Trump said he was unhappy that the country’s economic growth rate was under 3 percent a year. Trump said he thought the economy could grow at better-than-4-percent annual rate. But the numbers show that average quarterly economic growth under Trump, 2.5 percent, was almost exactly what it was under Obama in the second term, 2.4 percent. Other than the overall similarity, two things jump out of those numbers. First, Trump didn’t get near his 4 percent figure. Second, the growth that began in Obama’s second term and essentially continued under Trump was enough to create an economy that even Trump believes was great. In other words, there might be something to be said for slow-steady growth over a prolonged period of time. Job numbers for Obama and Trump show a similar story. The president rightly takes credit for having low unemployment during his presidency. In December of 2019, the unemployment rate was a scant 3.5 percent, the lowest it had been in 50 years. However, as good as that number was, when Trump took office the rate was already at 4.7 percent. That figure is quite low by historical standards (lower than all of the 1980s as well as most of the 1990s and 2000s). In December of 2017, it was the lowest the number had been since the Great Recession. In fact, Obama saw a much steeper drop in unemployment in his second term, a 3.3 drop in the rate, than Trump did in his first three years, a decline of 1.2 points. That’s not to besmirch the remarkably low unemployment under Trump, but it’s hard to ignore that the unemployment track under Obama had been downward. Again, the numbers look like the continuation of a trend , not something new. And the job creation numbers show more evidence for that view. On average, there were more jobs added monthly in Barack Obama’s second term than there were in Trump's first three years. On average, the country created 215,000 new jobs a month in Obama’s second term. In Trump’s first three years, the figure was 182,000. They are both good numbers and if you look at the jobs data plotted on a graph, the rise since 2011 actually looks pretty consistent. But that’s the point. Since the recovery from the last recession the numbers look like a slow, steady build. There is no sudden change when Trump takes office in 2017. There was nothing dramatic in the post-2011 job figures until the pandemic hit this spring. There is one big indicator that suggests a change under Trump, the rise in the stock market. The Dow Jones Industrial Average in particular took off when he won the presidency. On Dec. 31, 2019, the DJIA was at 28,538. That was up 56 percent from 18,332, where it was the day Trump was elected in 2016. That’s a pretty impressive run. (For the Dow, we use Election Day as the starting measure because investors can and often do react to big news events.) To be clear, Obama’s figures were not bad on this measure. From his second Election Day until 2016, the Dow climbed 38 percent. But Trump can rightfully brag about that climb and this week the DJIA has recovered most of what it lost in 2020. The real question is: How important is the Dow to the overall health of the economy? Other lingering problems, such as continued high unemployment and a projected drop in GDP for the year, only emphasize how that one measure doesn’t come close to telling the whole story of the economy. A president taking credit for the economy is nothing new, of course. It’s a time-honored tradition in politics. And there are parts of the economy that Trump can rightfully celebrate. But the idea that the president somehow rescued a nation that was struggling economically when he arrived simply isn’t borne out in the data. If Trump is re-elected, he would not be rebuilding the economy again; he would be taking on a new task he did not face when he first arrived in Washington. He might be the right person for that job, but there is little evidence in his record as president that says he is. Dante Chinni Dante Chinni is a contributor to NBC News specializing in data analysis around campaigns, politics and culture. About Contact Help Careers Ad Choices Privacy Policy Your Privacy Choices CA Notice Terms of Service (Updated JULY 7, 2023) NBC News Sitemap Closed Captioning Advertise Select Shopping © 2025 NBCUniversal Media, LLC NBC News Logo MSNBC Logo Today LogoPolitiFact | Fact-checking Rand Paul on Joe Biden and support for wars The Poynter Institute Menu Donate State Editions California Florida Iowa Michigan New Hampshire New York North Carolina Pennsylvania Texas West Virginia Wisconsin Issues All Issues Online hoaxes Coronavirus Health Care Immigration Extremism Taxes Marijuana Environment Crime Guns Foreign Policy LGBTQ+ People Donald Trump JD Vance Mitch McConnell Mike Johnson Joe Biden Media PunditFact Tucker Carlson Sean Hannity Rachel Maddow Bloggers PolitiFact Videos Campaigns 2024 Elections Truth-o-Meter True Mostly True Half True Mostly False False Pants on Fire Promises MAGA-Meter Biden Promise Tracker Trump-O-Meter Obameter Latest Promises About Us Our Process Our Staff En Español Who pays for PolitiFact? Advertise with Us Suggest a Fact-check Corrections and Updates Newsletters Donate Follow us The Facts Newsletter Sign up English Español Stand up for the facts! Our only agenda is to publish the truth so you can be an informed participant in democracy. We need your help. More Info I would like to contribute One Time Monthly Yearly Join Now Rand Paul stated on August 25, 2020 in a speech at the RNC: Says Joe Biden “voted for the Iraq War … He supported war in Serbia, Syria, Libya.” Iraq Foreign Policy Military Rand Paul Sen. Rand Paul, R-Ky., questions Secretary of State Mike Pompeo during a Senate Foreign Relations committee hearing on the State Department's 2021 budget on Capitol Hill, July 30, 2020, in Washington. (Jim Lo Scalzo/Pool via AP) By Miriam Valverde August 26, 2020 Fact-checking Rand Paul on Joe Biden and support for wars If Your Time is short Biden as a senator voted for resolutions that supported interventions in Iraq and Yugoslavia (Serbia and Montenegro). As vice president, he followed the policies of the Obama administration, which included interventions in Syria and Libya. Biden’s campaign said that Biden as vice president supported going into Syria, but pointed to 2016 reporting that said Biden within the White House argued against intervention in Libya. See the sources for this fact-check Republican Sen. Rand Paul advocated for President Donald Trump’s re-election by portraying him as someone who wants to end wars and casting Democratic presidential nominee Joe Biden as someone "who consistently called for more war." "Joe Biden voted for the Iraq War, which President Trump has long called the worst geopolitical mistake of our generation," Paul said Aug. 25 during the second night of the Republican National Convention. "I fear Biden will choose war again. He supported the war in Serbia, Syria, Libya." Is the senator from Kentucky right about Biden’s record? Biden voted for a resolution that paved the way for the Iraq War, and for a non-binding resolution to authorize military air operations against the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia (Serbia and Montenegro). The conflicts in Syria and Libya happened when Biden was vice president and followed the policies of President Barack Obama. Biden ‘voted for the Iraq War’ This checks out. In 2002, President George W. Bush argued that Iraqi president Saddam Hussein had chemical and biological weapons, sought nuclear weapons, supported terrorism, and threatened peace. In October 2002, then-U.S. Sen. Biden voted in favor of a resolution that authorized Bush to enforce ''all relevant'' United Nations Security Council resolutions on Iraq and if needed, to use military force against Iraq. Sign up for PolitiFact texts In a Senate floor speech before voting for the resolution, Biden said that "failure to overwhelmingly support" the resolution was "likely to enhance the prospects that war will occur." The objective of the resolution was to compel Iraq to destroy its weapons of mass destruction, Biden said. He left open the possibility that Hussein might "miscalculate" and "misjudge" U.S. resolve. In that event, use of military force might be needed, Biden said. The United States invaded Iraq on March 20, 2003, and the war officially ended in late 2011. No weapons of mass destruction were found. In 2005, Biden was asked i n an interview if his 2002 vote was a mistake. "It was a mistake," Biden answered. "It was a mistake to assume the president would use the authority we gave him properly. … We gave the president the authority to unite the world to isolate Saddam. And the fact of the matter is, we went too soon. We went without sufficient force. And we went without a plan." RELATED : Trump still wrong on his claim that he opposed Iraq War ahead of the invasion Biden ‘supported war in Serbia, Syria, Libya’ Serbia : Biden voted for a 1999 concurrent resolution authorizing President Bill Clinton to conduct military air operations and missile strikes against the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia (Serbia and Montenegro), in cooperation with North Atlantic Treaty Organization allies. (Concurrent resolutions express the sentiment of Congress, but are not signed by the president and do not carry the force of law.) Clinton in March 1999 ordered air strikes in response to Yugoslavia’s campaign of violence against ethnic Albanians in the province of Kosovo. The Kosovo conflict erupted in the 1990s between two groups within the former Yugoslavia — Kosovars, who are primarily ethnic Albanians, and Serbs, who are of Slavic descent. The two groups long disputed the territory known as Kosovo. After greater Yugoslavia fractured in the early 1990s, the dispute over Kosovo became violent, pitting the rebel Kosovo Liberation Army against the Serb-dominated government of what remained of Yugoslavia. Paul’s office referenced conflicts in Syria and Libya that started in 2011, when Biden was vice president. Featured Fact-check Paul Krugman stated on November 29, 2009 in ABC's 'This Week with George Stephanopoulos' "If you want to talk firsts for Bush, this was the first time in American history that a president took us into a war and cut taxes." By Robert Farley • November 30, 2009 Syria : Syrians began protesting their government in early 2011 , calling for political and social reforms and the ouster of their president. The protests prompted a violent response from the Syrian government. The conflict escalated as different groups within the country, foreign countries, and terrorists became involved. The United States since 2011 has called for Syria’s President Bashar al-Assad to step aside. The Obama administration in 2014 launched air strikes against the Islamic State in Syria and in 2015 deployed troops there to fight the terrorist group. Biden’s campaign said the Obama-Biden administration supported the Syrian opposition in a variety of ways, including by deploying U.S. forces to combat ISIS. Libya : The United States, as part of a NATO operation, provided air support in an intervention that resulted in the ouster of the country’s longtime dictator, Moammar Gadhafi. Obama said Gadhafi was launching military actions that were causing civilian deaths and forcing ordinary Libyans to escape to neighboring countries, threatening a humanitarian crisis within Libya and instability for its neighbors, Egypt and Tunisia. The U.S. military spent about $2 billion and several months backing the Libyan uprising against Gadhafi. The uprising — part of the Arab Spring — toppled Gadhafi in August 2011, and rebel forces killed him that October. Paul’s office sent us as a 2011 fact-check of Biden as evidence for his support of the U.S. intervention. In that fact-check, we examined Biden’s claim that in Libya, "America spent $2 billion total and didn’t lose a single life." We rated that Mostly True. (The fact-check did not focus on Biden’s own position on the issue.) Biden’s campaign, however, pointed to a 2016 Politico report that referenced an interview Biden gave to journalist Charlie Rose in which he said that intervening in Libya was wrong. The Politico story said that Biden told Rose that he had "argued strongly" within the White House "against going ... to Libya." Politico reported that Biden in that interview also said the United States should not use force unless the interests of the country or its allies are directly threatened, whether it can be done "efficaciously" and whether it can be sustained. Our ruling Paul said Biden, "Voted for the Iraq war … He supported war in Serbia, Syria, Libya." Biden as a senator voted for resolutions that supported interventions in Iraq and Yugoslavia (Serbia and Montenegro). As vice president, he followed the policies of the Obama administration, which included interventions in Syria and Libya. Biden’s campaign said that Biden as vice president supported going into Syria, but pointed to 2016 reporting that said Biden within the White House argued against intervention in Libya. Paul’s claim is accurate but needs clarification or additional information. We rate it Mostly True. Read About Our Process The Principles of the Truth-O-Meter Our Sources Email interview, Sen. Rand Paul’s press office, Aug. 25, 2020 Email interview, Joe Biden’s press office, Aug. 25, 2020 Congressional Research Service, Libya: Conflict, Transition, and U.S. Policy , June 26, 2020; U.S. Armed Forces Abroad: Selected Congressional Votes Since 1982 , Jan. 9, 2020; Libya: Unrest and U.S. Policy , March 29, 2011 Politico, Biden: I was right about Libya , June 21, 2016; Biden suggests 'military solution' to Syrian conflict , Jan. 23, 2016 Govtrack.us, S.Con.Res. 21 (106th): Kosovo resolution PolitiFact, Why Tulsi Gabbard calls the war in Syria a ‘regime change war’ , Oct. 16, 2019; Joe Biden falsely claims that he immediately opposed Iraq War , Sept. 5, 2019; Biden calls Libya a job well done , Nov. 3, 2011; Are U.S. actions in Libya subject to the War Powers Resolution? A review of the evidence , June 22, 2011 C-SPAN, User Clip: Biden's Floor Speech on Iraq War PBS.org, A Kosovo Chronology Browse the Truth-O-Meter More by Miriam Valverde Pramila Jayapal stated on August 30, 2021 in an Instagram post: “The average hospital stay for a case of COVID-19 costs about $17,064. The vaccine is free.” By Miriam Valverde • September 2, 2021 Mitt Romney stated on August 29, 2021 in a CNN interview: The Trump administration worked to free 5,000 Taliban prisoners. By Miriam Valverde • August 31, 2021 Joe Biden stated on August 20, 2021 in a press conference: There has been “no question of our credibility from our allies around the world” regarding how the U.S. is withdrawing from Afghanistan. By Miriam Valverde • August 26, 2021 Facebook posts stated on August 16, 2021 in a Facebook post: COVID-19 vaccinations are “a violation of the Nuremberg code." By Miriam Valverde • August 20, 2021 Ron DeSantis stated on August 4, 2021 in a press conference: Says Joe Biden has driven the current coronavirus surge because he “imported more virus from around the world by having a wide open southern border.” By Louis Jacobson • August 6, 2021 Ron DeSantis stated on June 16, 2021 in a press conference: “That meth … it’s almost all coming across the southern border and it’s been accelerating for the last six months.” By Miriam Valverde • June 21, 2021 Instagram posts stated on June 4, 2021 in an Instagram post: "920 women lose their unborn babies after getting vaccinated." By Miriam Valverde • June 8, 2021 Facebook posts stated on May 26, 2021 in a Facebook post: Police defunding is to blame for “skyrocketing murder rates” in Philadelphia, Minneapolis, Portland, New York City, Chicago, Los Angeles and Washington, D.C. By Miriam Valverde • May 28, 2021 Facebook posts stated on May 25, 2021 in a Facebook post: “Biden agrees to Pelosi's request to resign.” By Miriam Valverde • May 26, 2021 Facebook posts stated on May 17, 2021 in social media posts: “Gas prices highest in a decade. Worst jobs report in 2 decades. Highest inflation in 3 decades. Highest increase in illegal immigration in 4 decades.” By Louis Jacobson • May 26, 2021 Kevin McCarthy stated on May 12, 2021 in a statement to reporters: "I don't think anybody is questioning the legitimacy of the presidential election." By Miriam Valverde • May 14, 2021 Kamala Harris stated on May 4, 2021 in a speech: “The global cost of corruption is as much as 5% of the world's GDP.” By Miriam Valverde • May 7, 2021 Ron DeSantis stated on April 19, 2021 in a speech: “If you look at some of these places that (reduced police funding), they’ve already seen crime go up." By Miriam Valverde • May 4, 2021 Instagram posts stated on April 22, 2021 in an Instagram post: "Mountains of data" show drug ivermectin "basically obliterates" COVID-19 transmission. By Miriam Valverde • April 23, 2021 Facebook posts stated on April 7, 2021 in a Facebook post: Says the nation is locked down and there’s “a wide open border.” By Miriam Valverde • April 15, 2021 Fact-checking Rand Paul on Joe Biden and support for wars Clear Any Rating True Mostly True Half True Mostly False False Pants on Fire Full Flop Half Flip No Flip Any Speaker Any Date Range Last 3 Months Last 6 Months Last 12 Months 2025 2024 2023 2022 2021 2020 2019 2018 2017 2016 2015 2014 2013 2012 2011 2010 2009 2008 2007 Any Category Donald Trump stated on April 29, 2025 in an interview with ABC News: Kilmar Armando Abrego Garcia “had ‘MS-13’ on his knuckles tattooed. … He had ‘MS’ as clear as you can be. Not 'interpreted.’” By Louis Jacobson • April 30, 2025 Brian Tyler Cohen stated on April 12, 2025 in an X post: Trump “just denied North Carolina’s request for FEMA relief from Hurricane Helene.” By Paul Specht • April 24, 2025 Donald Trump stated on April 22, 2025 in remarks at the White House: “We had a couple of states where gasoline was at $1.98 a gallon.” By Louis Jacobson • April 24, 2025 Moms Demand Action for Gun Sense In America stated on April 17, 2025 in a Threads post: “Gun violence is the leading killer of college-aged people in the U.S.” By Loreben Tuquero • April 22, 2025 Michael Lawler stated on March 21, 2025 in a television interview: “If we don’t pass the tax bill by the end of the year, we will have the largest tax increase in American history.” By Jill Terreri Ramos • April 22, 2025 TikTok posts stated on April 21, 2025 in TikTok posts: “The Simpsons” predicted Pope Francis’ 2025 death. By Claire Cranford • April 22, 2025 X posts stated on April 13, 2025 in a post on X: Arizona Democrats “needed a lawsuit to force them to remove 50,000 noncitizens from voter rolls.” By Madison Czopek • April 18, 2025 Facebook posts stated on April 16, 2025 in Facebook posts: Former U.S. Rep. Liz Cheney wrote a viral letter to Democrats suggesting steps to take against the Trump administration. By Loreben Tuquero • April 18, 2025 Byron Donalds stated on April 10, 2025 in a NewsNation interview: Under the SAVE Act, “as long as you have a Real ID … it should be easy for you to register to vote.” By Grace Abels • April 18, 2025 Tim Walz stated on April 6, 2025 in an interview: “Less than half of Americans have $1,000 in savings.” By Claire Cranford • April 16, 2025 Load more Support independent fact-checking. Become a member! In a world of wild talk and fake news, help us stand up for the facts. Sign me up Offices District of Columbia 1800 I Street NW Washington, DC 20006 Florida 801 3rd St. S St. Petersburg, FL 33701 727-821-9494 People Donald Trump JD Vance Mitch McConnell Mike Johnson Joe Biden State Editions California Florida Iowa Michigan New Hampshire New York North Carolina Pennsylvania Texas West Virginia Wisconsin About Us Our Process Our Staff En Español Who pays for PolitiFact? Advertise with Us Corrections and Updates Newsletters RSS Feeds Recent Articles and Fact-checks Recent Fact-checks Suggest a Fact-check Follow us The Facts Newsletter Sign up Terms & Conditions Privacy Policy Copyright ©All Rights Reserved Poynter Institute 2020, a 501(c)(3) nonprofit organizationBiden's Record on Iraq War - FactCheck.org Facebook Twitter Tumblr Close Skip to main content FactCheck .org ® A Project of The Annenberg Public Policy Center FactCheck .org ® Home Articles FactCheck Posts SciCheck Debunking Viral Claims En Español Ask a Question Ask FactCheck Ask SciCheck Donate Topics President Trump health Coronavirus immigration climate change View All About Us Our Mission Our Process Our Funding Our Staff Undergraduate Fellows Awards Request a Correction Contact Us Search More Viral Claims Subscribe Instagram Threads YouTube X (Twitter) Facebook TikTok FactCheck On the Air Mailbag FactCheck Posts › Featured Posts Biden’s Record on Iraq War By Robert Farley Posted on September 10, 2019 1.3K 24 Twice in the last five weeks, Joe Biden has claimed that despite voting to authorize military force against Iraq in 2002, he opposed the Iraq war from “the moment” it began. That’s not accurate, and Biden now says he misspoke. The public position taken in the lead-up to and early days of the Iraq war has been a litmus test for many presidential candidates. Sen. Bernie Sanders proudly boasts about his vote — while serving as a member of the House in late 2002 — against authorizing use of military force against Iraq. While running for president, Donald Trump repeatedly claimed that he publicly opposed the Iraq war before the March 19, 2003, invasion, though we looked into it and could find no evidence that he ever did. As chairman of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee when the authorization vote was cast, Biden was at the forefront of the debate about what course to pursue with Iraq. As a result, he was also frequently quoted in the press and spoke numerous times from the Senate floor, providing ample evidence of his position over time. Biden was a consistent critic of the way the Bush administration handled the war: Its failure to exhaust diplomatic solutions, its failure to enlist a more robust group of allies for the war effort, and the lack of a plan for reconstruction of Iraq. Some of his comments proved to be quite prescient, including his warnings about the likely higher-than-expected cost and length of the war, and the complexity of “winning the peace” once Iraqi leader Saddam Hussein’s regime was toppled. But Biden never outright opposed military action in Iraq in the immediate days after the start of the invasion, as he claimed. He now admits his recent comments went too far. Biden’s Iraq Comments in 2019 During the second Democratic primary debate on July 31, Biden said his “bad judgment” in voting to authorize President George W. Bush to use military force against Iraq in 2002 was “trusting the president saying he was only doing this to get inspectors in and get the U.N. to agree to put inspectors in.” In a speech days before the 2002 vote, Bush did say approving the resolution “does not mean that military action is imminent or unavoidable,” but he also laid out in detail why military action “may” be needed. And on the day the war broke out, Biden acknowledged, “We voted to give him the authority to wage that war. We should step back and be supportive.” In the Democratic debate, Biden went on to say, “From the moment ‘shock and awe’ started, from that moment, I was opposed to the effort, and I was outspoken as much as anyone at all in the Congress and the administration.” During an interview on NPR on Sept. 3, Biden again claimed, “Immediately, the moment [shock and awe] started, I came out against the war at that moment.” Biden, Sept. 3 : I let my record stand. I think my record has been good. I think the vast majority of the foreign policy community thinks it’s been very good. For example, I got a commitment from President Bush he was not going to go to war in Iraq. He looked me in the eye in the Oval Office; he said he needed the vote to be able to get inspectors into Iraq to determine whether or not Saddam Hussein was engaged in dealing with a nuclear program. He got them in, and before we know it, we had a shock and awe. Immediately, the moment it started, I came out against the war at that moment. Now, the judgment of my trusting the president to keep his word on something like that, that was a mistake. And I apologize for that. Last month, when we reached out to the Biden campaign after Biden’s debate comment, a spokesman pointed us to comments Biden made the day before the war began and the day after. In those comments forwarded by the campaign, Biden lamented that the administration had not taken more steps toward a diplomatic solution, and warned of the need for a plan to “win the peace” after fighting ended. But Biden wasn’t against using military action against Iraq to force Iraq to give up weapons of mass destruction (which, as it turned out, it did not have). The day the war commenced, Biden told CNN : “There’s a lot of us who voted for giving the president the authority to take down Saddam Hussein if he didn’t disarm. And there are those who believe, at the end of the day, even though it wasn’t handled all that well, we still have to take him down.” During a TV interview taped for WMUR in New Hampshire on Sept. 7, Biden acknowledged that he “misspoke” in the debate and that “the misrepresentation was how quickly I said I was immediately against the war. I was against the war internally and trying to put together coalitions to try change the way in which the war was conducted.” Biden said he “argued that the way we went to war was wrong, number one. And number two, the way we were conducting the war was wrong.” The Biden campaign also provided a statement to the Washington Pos t acknowledging that “Vice President Biden misspoke by saying that he declared his opposition to the war immediately.” “He opposed the way we went to war and the way the war was being carried out,” the statement continued. “He has for many years called his vote a mistake and takes full responsibility for it. The Bush Administration assured then-Senator Biden that the purpose of the Authorization for the Use of Military Force was to strengthen our position at the U.N. Security Council to get weapons inspectors back into Iraq, and that diplomacy would be exhausted without a premature rush to war. The U.N. element of this strategy worked: after Congress passed the AUMF, the Security Council voted 15-0 to send the inspectors back and Saddam gave them access. However, the Bush Administration plunged the nation into war anyway, without allowing the inspectors to finish their job — which was profoundly misguided. Once the war began, then-Senator Biden was immediately clear in his opposition to how we got into the conflict and the way it was being conducted — including the failure to exhaust diplomacy or enlist allies, the reliance on and hyping of faulty intelligence, and the absence of a viable plan to win the peace. He was adamant that, however misguided the war, we owed it to our troops to support them, and he fought for investments like MRAPs [Mine-Resistant Ambush Protected vehicles] that saved hundreds of lives from IEDs.” Given the issue’s likely prominence in the campaign, we think it’s instructive to review some of the background and Biden’s public statements at several critical junctures. Leading Up to the Vote In a speech to the nation several days before Congress’ authorization of force vote and five months before the start of the war, the president detailed the case against Iraq, arguing that the country had violated the requirements of the truce that ended the Persian Gulf War in 1991 to “destroy its weapons of mass destruction, to cease all development of such weapons, and to stop all support for terrorist groups.” He also said Hussein was pursuing the development of nuclear weapons. All of that posed a threat to the U.S., Bush warned. “Some believe we can address this danger by simply resuming the old approach to inspections, and applying diplomatic and economic pressure,” Bush said. “Yet this is precisely what the world has tried to do since 1991.” And, he said, those methods failed. Bush, Oct. 7, 2002 : After eleven years during which we have tried containment, sanctions, inspections, even selected military action, the end result is that Saddam Hussein still has chemical and biological weapons and is increasing his capabilities to make more. And he is moving ever closer to developing a nuclear weapon. Although Bush called for new, tougher inspections and sanctions, he also made clear that war was an option. “The time for denying, deceiving, and delaying has come to an end,” Bush said. “Saddam Hussein must disarm himself — or, for the sake of peace, we will lead a coalition to disarm him.” “I hope this will not require military action, but it may,” Bush said. Biden’s Speech Prior to Vote Three days later, just prior to the vote to authorize military force, Biden gave a lengthy speech from the floor of the Senate and explained why he would vote for the resolution (beginning on S10290). Biden said he viewed the resolution not as a “rush to war,” as some of his Democratic colleagues alleged, but rather a “march to peace and security.” “I believe passage of this, with strong support, is very likely to enhance the prospects that the secretary of state will get a strong resolution out of the [United Nations] Security Council,” Biden said. Biden added that the resolution would increase the probability the U.N. would get inspectors into Iraq to do meaningful investigations of its weapons program. “I will vote for this because we should be compelling Iraq to make good on its obligations to the United Nations,” Biden said. “Because while Iraq’s illegal weapons of mass destruction program do not — do not — pose an imminent threat to our national security, in my view, they will, if left unfettered. And because a strong vote in Congress, as I said, increases the prospect for a tough, new U.N. resolution on weapons of mass destruction, it is likely to get weapons inspectors in, which, in turn, decreases the prospects of war, in my view.” Biden seized on this statement in Bush’s address to the nation: “Approving this resolution does not mean that military action is imminent or unavoidable.” Biden praised Bush for choosing, up to that point, “a course of moderation and deliberation” and noted that Bush promised that any military action would be “with allies at our side.” Biden said the resolution emphasized “the importance of international support, manifested through the United Nations Security Council.” Though Biden pushed forcefully for a wider international response, he was not opposed to military action, if necessary. “Ultimately, either those weapons must be dislodged from Iraq, or Saddam must be dislodged from power,” Biden said. It’s true, as Biden has said recently, that he saw the resolution as a means to compel Iraq to allow weapons inspectors back in. Biden, Oct. 10, 2002 : Concerning Iraq, our first step should be the one the president apparently has chosen: to get the weapons inspectors back into Iraq. … I agree with President Bush that given a new mandate and the authority to go any place, any time, with no advance warning, U.N. inspections can work. They can succeed in discovering and destroying much of Saddam’s chemical and biological arsenals and his missile program. They can delay and derail his efforts to acquire nuclear weapons and, at the very least, they will give us a clearer picture of what Saddam has, force him to focus on hiding his weapons and not building more, and it will buy us time to build a strong coalition to act if he refuses to disarm. Biden argued the resolution “would finally force Saddam to face the choice between inspectors and invaders … and there is at least a chance that he might make the right choice.” Biden also warned that the cost of a war would be much higher than most Americans believed, and that reconstruction of Iraq would be difficult, costly and likely take a decade — comments that seem prescient given how events unfolded. But again, Biden said he was not opposed to military action if diplomacy failed. “There is also a chance Saddam will once again miscalculate, that he will misjudge our resolve, and in that event we must be prepared to use force with others if we can, and alone if we must,” Biden said. The resolution passed the House 296-133 on Oct. 10, 2002. It passed the Senate the following day 77-33. U.N. Action On Nov. 8, 2002, the U.N. Security Council unanimously passed Resolution 1441, which stated that Iraq was “in material breach of its obligations” regarding its disarmament agreements following the Persian Gulf War, and accused Iraq of failing to cooperate with U.N. weapons inspectors and the International Atomic Energy Agency. The resolution offered Hussein “a final opportunity to comply with [Iraq’s] disarmament obligations” and set up “an enhanced inspection regime with the aim of bringing to full and verified completion the disarmament process.” The resolution gave Iraq 30 days to provide a complete declaration of “all aspects of its programmes to develop chemical, biological, and nuclear weapons, ballistic missiles, and other delivery systems.” Biden hailed the move as “an important victory for American diplomacy,” and he praised Bush for “forging an international consensus on Saddam’s obligation to disarm.” “By going through the United Nations, we have gained critical international support if it becomes necessary to use force to disarm Saddam,” Biden said. In early 2003, the Bush administration began pushing for a second U.N. resolution setting a deadline for Hussein and authorizing military force if necessary to get Hussein to disarm. But the resolution was met with resistance from several key members, including France, Germany, Russia and China. In a speech before the U.N. on Feb. 5, 2003, then-Secretary of State Colin Powell said, “The facts on Iraqis’ behavior … demonstrate that Saddam Hussein and his regime have made no effort — no effort — to disarm as required by the international community. Indeed, the facts on … Iraq’s behavior show that Saddam Hussein and his regime are concealing their efforts to produce more weapons of mass destruction.” He then laid out the case for that assertion based on U.S. intelligence. In an interview hours after Powell’s speech, Biden appeared on CNN and was asked, “Did Secretary of State Powell today close the deal in your mind to those who at least have an open mind about the situation in Iraq?” “Absolutely,” Biden said. “He made a compelling case. The predominance of the evidence, the pure weight of the evidence, I think anyone. … Let me put it this way, if I were back practicing law I can’t imagine I could not convince an open-minded jury of the facts that he presented as having been true.” Biden insisted, however, that “we may be a step closer to peace. … The ball, as they say, is in Saddam’s court. … The security council’s on the line here. They’re either going to prove they are relevant or irrelevant, because I don’t think any open-minded person could argue that Saddam is not in material breach of the U.N. resolution 1441.” Biden argued in a Washington Post op-ed on March 10, 2003, that the U.S. ought to seek a second U.N. resolution giving Iraq “ more time for Iraq to meet specific disarmament demands ” but also getting a commitment from the U.N. to use force if Iraq failed to meet deadlines. Bush ultimately made the decision to go to war with Iraq, which began with the “shock and awe” bombing attack on March 19, 2003 . The U.S. was backed with troops from just four other countries: Australia, Denmark, Poland and the United Kingdom. Bush announced that the “ major military combat actions” in Iraq — officially dubbed Operation Iraqi Freedom — ended on May 1, 2003. The Days Just Before and After Invasion In the hours before bombing began, Biden appeared on CNN and again warned that a large international group would be needed to successfully navigate, and help pay for, the rebuilding of Iraq once the fighting stopped. “And so that’s why I hope we begin a new round of diplomacy on, what [happens] after Saddam. Who is going to be in there with us?” Biden said. Biden was asked about comments made by fellow Democratic Sen. Tom Daschle two days prior that he was “[s] addened that we have to give up one life because this president couldn’t create the kind of diplomatic effort that was so critical for our country.” “There’s a lot of us who voted for giving the president the authority to take down Saddam Hussein if he didn’t disarm,” Biden said. “And there are those who believe, at the end of the day, even though it wasn’t handled all that well, we still have to take him down. But what you are sensing from some Democrats, as well as Republicans, is a frustration relating to the lost opportunities of maybe being able to do this with others, maybe, if we had others with us, not even having to go to war. So I don’t think it’s anything other than a frustration. “But I think it’s time we stop all that,” Biden said. “We have one single focus. And that is, we’re about to send our women and men to war. The president is the commander in chief. We voted to give him the authority to wage that war. We should step back and be supportive.” On April 2, 2003, Biden was again asked in a CNN interview about Daschle’s comments critical of Bush’s diplomatic efforts. This time, Biden said he “disagreed” with Daschle, who, like Biden, voted in favor of the authorization of force. “The way the Constitution works is, we voted to give the president the authority to go to war,” Biden said. “It’s our decision whether or not we go from a state of peace to a state of war. We gave him that authority. You can second guess whether we should have or not. Once we’ve [done] that then it’s his decision to prosecute the war. I wish he had been more successful and more earnest [in] his diplomacy. And my prayer now is … that he’ll be more successful in diplomacy of how to win the peace. But as the conduct of the war goes, that’s his call.” In an interview with Charlie Rose on March 20, 2003, the day after the start of the war, Rose asked about Biden’s comment that the war was the biggest roll of the dice by a president he had seen during his 30 years in the Senate. Biden said that comment referred to “the willingness to go without any real consensus in the world community.” Rose then asked if there was “a payoff at the end that justifies the risk” of war with Iraq. “I think there’s a payoff at the end and that is Saddam Hussein being separated from weapons of mass destruction and enforcing a U.N. commitment made by Saddam about those weapons,” Biden said. Later, Rose asked, “If in fact the war goes well, in however you define that … would you then say that George Bush made a wise decision in rolling the dice to disarm Saddam Hussein?” “I all along, Charlie, believed the right decision is to separate him from his weapons and/or separate him from power,” Biden said. “If the U.N. didn’t do it, do it?” Rose interjected. “Yes, you’ve gotta do it,” Biden said. “Now, it’s not the time to argue it, but I am disturbed at the lost opportunities we had to bring the rest of the world along with us to this point. … And now the question is … can you make lemonade out of lemons here? And I think we have an opportunity in the aftermath of this war to repair those kinds of breaches and end up where we should be anyway, which is having made the right decision to take him down, and having not fractured in any permanent way alliances and opportunities that we’re going to need available to us, Charlie, to deal with other major problems facing us in the world, from the Korean peninsula to South Asia, to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict.” Biden continued to make similar comments in the months after the war started. For example, in a Brookings Institution address on July 31, 2003, Biden again defended his vote to authorize the use of military force in Iraq. The Bush administration was “ right to confront the challenge posed by Saddam thumbing his nose at the world and refusing — refusing — to alter his conduct,” Biden said . “ Contrary to what some in my party might think, Iraq was a problem that had to be dealt with sooner, rather than later. So I commend the president. He was right to enforce the solemn commitments made by Saddam. If they were not enforced … what good would they be and what value those institutions? For me, the issue was never whether we had to deal with Saddam, but when and how we dealt with Saddam. And it’s precisely the when and how that I think this administration got wrong. We went to war too soon. We went to war with too few troops. We went to war without the world, when we could have had many with us, and we’re paying the price for it now.” It wasn’t until Nov. 27, 2005, that Biden acknowledged on NBC’s “Meet the Press” that his 2002 vote authorizing force in Iraq was “a mistake.” “ It was a mistake,” Biden said. “It was a mistake to assume the president would use the authority we gave him properly. … We gave the president the authority to unite the world to isolate Saddam. And the fact of the matter is, we went too soon. We went without sufficient force. And we went without a plan .” Categories FactCheck Posts Featured Posts Tags 2020 Election Location International Issue authorizing force in Iraq Iraq war People Joe Biden Previous Story Buttigieg Wrong About Climate Change’s Effect on Oceans Next Story Meme Misleads on Walmart Gun Sales Ask FactCheck Q: Is it true the rumor that all Social Security beneficiaries will have to go to a location to verify their identity to receive their monthly check? A: The Social Security Administration had announced new policies on identity verification that would have required those applying for retirement and survivor benefits for the first time to verify their identity either online or in person at a field office. Phone verification wasn’t going to be an option any longer. However, the SSA canceled that policy days before it was to take effect. Direct deposit changes can only be done online or in person. Read the full question and answer View the Ask FactCheck archives Have a question? Ask us. Donate Now Because facts matter. SciCheck's COVID-19/Vaccination Project Preempting and exposing vaccination and COVID-19 misinformation. Proyecto de Vacunación/COVID-19 Precaviendo y exponiendo la desinformación sobre el COVID-19 y sus vacunas SciCheck Fact-checking science-based claims. Facebook Initiative Debunking viral claims. Players Guide 2024 The special interest groups behind the TV ads. Viral Spiral Don’t get spun by internet rumors. Sign Up Get free email alerts. Mailbag Letters from our readers. On the Air Our staff on TV and radio. NewsFeed Defenders A media literacy game to detect misinformation. Archives Privacy Copyright Policy Contact Us Report Accessibility Issues and Get Help © Copyright 2025 FactCheck.org ® A Project of The Annenberg Public Policy Center of the University of PennsylvaniaDid President Buhari sign a new Police bill to allow officers arrest without a warrant? Yes! - Dubawa Wednesday, May 7 2025 Latest Posts False! Tinubu did not sack EFCC chairperson over VDM’s arrest Hoton EFCC ta kama VDM, Kwaskwarima ce #BehindTheFacts: Discussing ethnic disinformation and online hate with Miracle Akubuo Viral EFCC mugshot of VDM, manipulated Viral WhatsApp message claiming INEC chairperson apologised for election manipulation, clickbait Has Liberian Speaker, Fonati Koffa, resigned? Le Sénégal dispose d’un Centre de traitement des incidents informatiques; même s’il n’est pas pleinement opérationnel False! No Fire at EcoBank Branch Do children need added sugar for brain development? GistReel updates report after DUBAWA’s fact check Search for Switch skin Sidebar WhatsApp TikTok Instagram YouTube LinkedIn Twitter Facebook Menu Search for Home About Dubawa Governance & Organisation Team Content Categories Our Fact-Check Process Corrections Policy Publishers Correction Policy Independence Policy Funding Terms of Use Fact Checks Explainers Media Literacy News DUBAWA In-depth DUBAWA In-depth Research African Languages Hausa Igbo Krio Yoruba Country Dubawa Ghana Liberia Sierra Leone The Gambia Senegal Côte d’Ivoire Guinée Bissau Facebook Checks DONATE Analysis Article Featured Mainstream Politics Security Did President Buhari sign a new Police bill to allow officers arrest without a warrant? Yes! Benedicta Akpede Send an email October 6, 2020 30 3 minutes read Facebook Twitter LinkedIn Messenger Messenger WhatsApp Telegram Share via Email Print A Twitter user claims that President Buhari has signed a new police bill that grants police officers the power to arrest without a warrant or court order. The claim that President Buhari has signed a new police bill which allows the police to arrest without a warrant or court order is true. The bill is confirmed to have been in place since September 16, 2020. Full Text On August 24, a verified twitter handle, Wanazila (@wana_) claimed that President Muhammadu Buhari has signed a new police bill that gives the Police the right to arrest without a warrant or court order. Culled from twitter.com Following the claim on the ‘new provision’ in the New Police Act, controversies have been stirred up in the comment section. Some persons have tagged the claim as fake news. For instance, Thelomen Tarteno with the user name @narpako, wrote, ‘Jumping to conclusions, sensationalism, peddling misinformation and all-out spreading of bullshit is the universal talent shared by a great many Nigerians’. Tammy Solo Qtified (@tmscool) wrote, ‘You are one of the reasons we can’t move forward. You thrive in peddling false info or uninformed info just to feel relevant right?’ Some other people believe the law has been existing before now and see no reason why it should be newsworthy. For instance, A twitter user Abiola De Moe (@abiolamoe) wrote, ‘This isn’t a new law. A police officer can affect arrest in an on-going crime or that which is about to happen without a warrant. Stop trying to add this to one of the regular ‘troll-the government threads…’ another user named Dami (@TheAngleDami) said ‘‘Buhari didn’t just sign this… This law has always been there…’. This tweet garnered a whopping 2.6k retweets, 734 quoted tweets and 1.6k likes. With diverse opinions that ranged from disbelief, doubt to believability. Verification Information about the signing of the b ill was shared by credible news sources , on September 16, 2020, when President Muhammadu Buhari assented to a new Nigeria Police Bill, 2020. The new act which has 142 sections explains the general duties of the Police to include, among others, protection of the rights and freedom of every person in Nigeria, the African Charter on Human and Peoples Rights and any other law; provision on humanitarian assistance for citizens, facilitation of movement on highways, etc without subjecting citizens to extortion, and adoption of community partnership in the performance of police duties. The power to arrest without a warrant was spelt out in Section 38(1) of the act. “(1) In addition to the powers of arrest without warrant conferred upon a police officer by section 10 of the Criminal Procedure Act, it shall be lawful for any police officer and any person whom he may call to his assistance, to arrest without warrant in the following cases- [Cap. C41.] (a) any person whom he finds committing any felony, misdemeanour or simple offence, or whom he reasonably suspects of having committed or of being about to commit any felony, misdemeanour or breach of the peace; (b) any person whom any other person charged with having committed a felony or misdemeanour; (c) any person whom any other person- (i) suspects of having committed a felony or misdemeanour; or (ii) charges with having committed a simple offence, if such other person is willing to accompany the police officer to the police station and to enter into a recognisance to prosecute such charge.” In summary, the bill states that a police officer has the power to arrest whom he suspects (on a reasonable ground) of having committed an offence unless the law creating the offence provides that the suspect cannot be arrested without a warrant. “(2) The provisions of this section shall not apply to any offence with respect to which it is provided that any offender may not be arrested without warrant.” Further research shows that the repealed Police Cap P19 LFN 2004 Act also has provision for the ‘no warrant arrest’ in section 24(1) of the repealed Act. It states It states, “ A police officer may, without an order of a court and without a warrant arrest a suspect: Whom he suspects on reasonable grounds of having committed an offence against a law in Nigeria or against the law of any other country unless these creating the offence provides that the suspect cannot be arrested without warrant.” CONCLUSION The viral tweet on the New Police Act by the Twitter user is TRUE . President Muhammadu Buhari assented to a new Nigeria Police Bill, 2020 which accords police officers the power to arrest without a warrant except on grounds where the laws spelling out an offence permit a warrant before an arrest. Benedicta Akpede Send an email October 6, 2020 30 3 minutes read Facebook Twitter LinkedIn Messenger Messenger WhatsApp Telegram Share via Email Print Show More Share Facebook Twitter LinkedIn Messenger Messenger WhatsApp Telegram Share via Email Print Related Articles POST EDO ELECTION FACT-CHECKS: Edo 2024 Governorship Election September 22, 2024 The use of ‘Air Doctor’ virus blockers as protection against COVID-19, how effective are they? October 2, 2020 Misleading: Trending clip of celestial bodies at EKSU, a visual effect July 20, 2023 Viral quote claiming Lai Mohammed threatening the US, UK and the EU is fake December 8, 2020 Leave a Reply Cancel reply Your email address will not be published. Required fields are marked * Comment * Name * Email * Website Δ Check Also Close Fact Check Claim FBI uncovered $6 billion, INEC result sheets from Wike’s London house, false September 30, 2024 Got a claim for us to fact-check? Is there a claim that you would like us to investigate? Has a politician, a business or union leader, a health association or environmental group said something that you suspect is untrue or misleading and that should be challenged? We cannot investigate every claim sent to us. But we will log all suggestions and appreciate your help, so kindly contact us . Dubawa is guided by firm principles of accountability, truth and collaboration; by creating a community for citizens to report and question the information posited by the media, the government and influential people. © Copyright 2025, All Rights Reserved | CJID Donate Home Dubawa Team Research Contact Us Facebook Twitter LinkedIn YouTube Instagram TikTok WhatsApp Facebook Twitter LinkedIn Messenger Messenger WhatsApp Telegram Back to top button Close Search for: Facebook Twitter LinkedIn YouTube Instagram TikTok WhatsApp Popular Posts Spoofs Whatsapp offer of free 50GB data is a Hoax! July 13, 2020 Michael Jackson did not sing Islamic song that allegedly put Saudi Arabia in debt August 26, 2021 Sucking a woman’s breast will not reduce her risks of breast cancer April 8, 2021 Sex Will NOT Kill Coronavirus! March 4, 2020 Fact-Check: Viral Achraf Hakimi – Hiba Abouk divorce settlement posts fake April 26, 2023 Most Commented July 13, 2020 Whatsapp offer of free 50GB data is a Hoax! June 1, 2022 SPOTLIGHT: Crowd1 is still around. Here are new ways the platform defraud people August 11, 2023 BEWARE! Norland, not an investment company July 12, 2023 Alleged video of Jackie Chan and his daughter sobbing, misleading! April 18, 2022 Alleged video of man hitting woman with pressing iron not of late singer, Osinachi September 22, 2023 WEEK FOR TRUTH 2023: CALL FOR VOLUNTEERS Recent Comments IKEH CHIDI ALLOY I really appreciate Facebook on this issue implore Facebook... Eugene Okky dubawa. Org leave it to the Nigerian to help facts abou... Ernest Is the DEW water in Ghana?... Richard I'm sorry for the wrong post... AMINU MURTALA How to get the results of the world ❤️ I can do that too muc... Translate » Close Search forFact Check: Higher Corporate Tax Revenue After GOP Tax Reform Debunks Another Democrat Myth – Ways and Means Skip to content About The Chairman The Committee Membership Subcommittees Internships News 2025 Tax Teams Activity Hearings Markups Calendar Listening To Americans Twitter Instagram Youtube Fact Check: Higher Corporate Tax Revenue After GOP Tax Reform Debunks Another Democrat Myth April 18, 2022 A new report from the Congressional Budget Office shows that corporate tax revenue is set to hit a new record of $454 billion – 22 percent higher than last year’s record. CBO’s analysis contradicts President Biden’s false claim that the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act (TCJA) led to less revenue from corporations. This amount exceeds CBO’s own forecasts prior to enactment of TCJA and debunks Democrats’ main excuse to raise taxes on American businesses. Even the Biden Administration predicts that under Republicans’ tax reform law, corporate tax revenues will climb in 2025 to an even higher amount than the Trump administration predicted in 2017. As the Tax Foundation points out , “[I]t seems clear that the 2017 tax reform did not substantially reduce the revenue potential of the corporate tax.” KEY POINTS: Corporate tax revenue is shattering records under Republican tax reform. Corporate tax revenue is coming in 22 percent higher than last year’s record level, according to the CBO’s most recent monthly budget review . Corporate tax revenue is set to hit a new record of $454 billion. CBO had predicted in June 2017 that corporate tax revenue would only hit $389 billion in 2022. As a share of GDP, corporate tax revenue is on track to reach its highest level since 2015 (1.9 percent of GDP). Overall tax revenue is also strong, including individual, payroll, and other taxes. Individual income tax receipts reached an all-time high of $2.04 trillion in FY2021. Receipts are already coming in 36 percent higher in FY2022. Total federal tax collections, including payroll and other taxes, are on track to reach $5.04 trillion in FY22, or 21.0 percent of GDP. This would be a new all-time high in both cases. Democrats ignore this progress in favor of raising taxes even higher on Americans, including in President Biden’s most recent budget request. Democrats seek the highest sustained tax burden in American history. House Budget Committee Republicans’ analysis shows $58 trillion in tax hikes (an 80 percent increase over previous 10 years) that breaks President Biden’s tax pledge by hitting the middle class and small family businesses, and does even more socialist spending. READ: House Budget Committee Analysis, “Biden’s FY23 Budget: Another Year of Crisis” (PDF) Democrats’ tax plan makes inflation worse when it is already 276 percent higher than predicted by Biden’s budget last year because of higher spending . But higher taxes will also result in higher prices for consumers. American families paid a $5,000 inflation tax in 2021 and view Washington spending as a big part of the problem. Biden’s international tax increases make it better to be a foreign company or worker. American companies will pay a global minimum tax rate higher than the 15 percent rate the Biden Administration will allow for other countries. This economic surrender will make Americans less competitive and will drive manufacturing, research, and investment overseas. Worse, America will be less competitive with a higher tax rate than Communist China , sending jobs fleeing overseas. Democrats’ revive their supercharged death tax that targets family-owned businesses and farms, costing at least 1 million jobs. Analysis by the Family Business Estate Tax Coalition, Democrats’ death tax will destroy over a million jobs, slash paychecks for workers by $32 for every $100 in revenue raised, and shrink our economy by $100 billion over the next decade. Internships Minority Subscribe Archive Privacy Policy News Twitter Instagram Youtube 1139 Longworth HOB Washington D.C. 20515 | P: (202) 225-3625The Trump Tax Cuts’ Benefits Were Outweighed by Lost Revenue | Chicago Booth Review This website uses cookies to ensure the best user experience. Privacy & Cookies Notice Accept Cookies Manage My Cookies Manage Cookie Preferences Accept All Cookies Reject All Cookies NECESSARY COOKIES These cookies are essential to enable the services to provide the requested feature, such as remembering you have logged in. ALWAYS ACTIVE Accept | Reject PERFORMANCE AND ANALYTIC COOKIES These cookies are used to collect information on how users interact with Chicago Booth websites allowing us to improve the user experience and optimize our site where needed based on these interactions. All information these cookies collect is aggregated and therefore anonymous. FUNCTIONAL COOKIES These cookies enable the website to provide enhanced functionality and personalization. They may be set by third-party providers whose services we have added to our pages or by us. TARGETING OR ADVERTISING COOKIES These cookies collect information about your browsing habits to make advertising relevant to you and your interests. The cookies will remember the website you have visited, and this information is shared with other parties such as advertising technology service providers and advertisers. SOCIAL MEDIA COOKIES These cookies are used when you share information using a social media sharing button or “like” button on our websites, or you link your account or engage with our content on or through a social media site. The social network will record that you have done this. This information may be linked to targeting/advertising activities. Confirm My Selections Search The University of Chicago Booth School of Business Monetary Policy Inequality Health Care Climate Change Artificial Intelligence Motivation Jobs +All CBR Topics Skip to main content The University of Chicago Booth School of Business Monetary Policy Inequality Health Care Climate Change Artificial Intelligence Motivation Jobs +All CBR Topics Chicago Booth Review Monetary Policy Inequality Health Care Climate Change Artificial Intelligence Motivation Jobs All Chicago Booth Review Topics The Trump Tax Cuts’ Benefits Were Outweighed by Lost Revenue Chicago Booth Review The Trump Tax Cuts’ Benefits Were Outweighed by Lost Revenue Monetary Policy Inequality Health Care Climate Change Artificial Intelligence Motivation Jobs All Chicago Booth Review Topics Associated Press The Trump Tax Cuts’ Benefits Were Outweighed by Lost Revenue With some of the law’s provisions set to expire, research offers lessons for lawmakers. By Neil Weinberg December 18, 2024 CBR - Fiscal Policy Share This Page During the fierce congressional debates that led to the passage of the 2017 Tax Cuts and Jobs Act, advocates and opponents of the proposal agreed on one thing: The once-in-a-generation bill, under the helm of President Donald Trump, would profoundly change how the United States raised tax revenue. Proponents declared that the proposal would give private enterprise, wages, and American competitiveness such a boost that it would fill in much of the revenue gap created by lowering tax rates. Detractors argued that the legislation favored the rich and would send the federal deficit soaring. An analysis of the tax cuts by Harvard’s Gabriel Chodorow-Reich , Princeton’s Owen Zidar , and Chicago Booth’s Eric Zwick finds that the TCJA has boosted investment, as well as wages and economic activity—but not nearly enough to make up for substantial losses in corporate tax revenues that have increased the deficit. The researchers offer their findings as lessons for lawmakers who are facing a fresh round of tax battles. In a flourish of Washington political engineering, backers of the 2017 law lowered projections of its future cost by setting many provisions to expire in 2025. Renewing all the provisions might be politically expedient but expensive, they caution. The 2017 tax law, often called the “Trump Tax Cuts,” represented the biggest business tax cut in US history and landed at a time when the status of America’s business tax regime had changed dramatically relative to peer countries. In 1988, the top US corporate tax rate of 34 percent was the second lowest among seven leading industrialized economies. However, the six other countries all cut their top rates over the years that followed, leaving the US with the highest levies among the group as lawmakers debated the TCJA. The TCJA cut the top statutory tax rate on corporate income from 35 to 21 percent and allowed companies to write off equipment purchases immediately (rather than depreciating them more slowly). It included a deduction designed to encourage companies to locate intangible capital, such as intellectual property, in the US. It also eliminated the corporate alternative minimum tax; and changed how foreign-source income is taxed. Lastly, to offset some of the law’s costs, the TCJA eliminated C corporations’ ability to reduce prior-year taxes with “carry back” losses. The researchers acknowledge that the rates and methods the government uses to tax businesses invariably involve trade-offs with profound effects on the economy and wealth distribution. Taxing business income directly generates substantial tax revenue. It also reduces the scope of tax avoidance and evasion by limiting the gamesmanship that takes place when there’s a gap between tax rates on capital and labor income. A system that closes avenues for business owners to pay lower tax rates than their workers improves economic equality. And taxing corporate income provides an indirect way of raising revenue from foreigners, nonprofits, pensioners, and others, who collectively own three-quarters of US equity but are exempt from dividend and capital gains taxes. On the downside, taxing business income tends to weigh on the economy. It does so by reducing the incentive to accumulate capital and start new businesses or expand existing ones. That, in turn, lowers national income. Lower rates lead to less revenue A model of the 2017 Tax Cuts and Jobs Act, assuming its provisions are made permanent, predicts that over the first decade, gains in tax revenue from higher wages and changes in business behavior (such as increased investment) are too small to offset the revenue loss from the lowered corporate tax rate. With these pluses and minuses in mind, the researchers developed a framework for assessing the tax cuts’ actual effects. They summarized what is currently known about the costs and benefits of the legislation and the implications for future US tax policy, building on empirical work on how the law has affected domestic tax revenue, private sector investment, and GDP—and how that compares with policymakers’ predictions. Among the research they cite is a paper by Zwick and coauthors that finds, among other things, that the law reduced corporate tax revenue by 40 percent. Companies that enjoyed larger cuts invested more than companies that saw less tax relief, increasing their total tangible corporate investment by 8–14 percent, the researchers write. Also, changes made to the taxation of foreign income had domestic implications. For example, US multinationals that benefited also boosted domestic operations. But these benefits were dwarfed by forgone tax revenue, according to the researchers. Additionally, while the Council of Economic Advisers had predicted the TCJA would benefit full-time employees by up to $9,000 on average (in 2017 dollars), the researchers indicate it actually produced a wage boost that averaged $750. Long-term GDP grew by less than 1 percent annually, they find. The researchers note that the government’s fiscal picture has worsened since the passage of the tax cuts. Extending most or all of the expiring and expired provisions while letting the rate cut for corporations remain would be costly relative to the growth it would buy, the researchers write, especially given the substantial rise in interest rates over the past seven years. Among the risks of extending costly provisions is the prospect that government deficit financing will crowd out investment, complicating the Federal Reserve’s mandate of seeking low inflation and full employment. As policymakers consider their options, the researchers note that some of the provisions on the chopping block—such as accelerated depreciation—generate more economic value per dollar of tax revenue than others. In contrast, tax cuts for closely held pass-through businesses look expensive based on the relatively small amount of investment they encourage and the incentives they give business owners to recharacterize high-tax labor income as business income. They also are regressive, delivering the biggest gains to the highest earners. Works Cited Gabriel Chodorow-Reich, Owen Zidar, and Eric Zwick, “Lessons from the Biggest Business Tax Cut in US History,” Working paper, July 2024. Gabriel Chodorow-Reich, Matt Smith, Owen Zidar, and Eric Zwick, “Tax Policy and Investment in a Global Economy,” Working paper, March 2024. Related Topics CBR - Fiscal Policy Taxes Public Policy CBR - Public Policy CBR - Economics Economics CBR - Spring 2025 More from Chicago Booth Review Related Topics CBR - Fiscal Policy Taxes Public Policy CBR - Public Policy CBR - Economics Economics CBR - Spring 2025 More from Chicago Booth Your Privacy We want to demonstrate our commitment to your privacy. Please review Chicago Booth's privacy notice , which provides information explaining how and why we collect particular information when you visit our website. The University of Chicago Booth School of Business Explore CBR + All CBR Topics About Us All Issues Contact Us Chicago Booth Privacy Notice Accessibility Follow Chicago Booth Review Research driven insights on business, policy, and markets. © 2004-2025 Chicago Booth ReviewDNC: Three things the Democrats don’t want to talk about Skip to content British Broadcasting Corporation Home News Sport Business Innovation Culture Arts Travel Earth Audio Video Live Home News Israel-Gaza War War in Ukraine US & Canada UK UK Politics England N. Ireland N. Ireland Politics Scotland Scotland Politics Wales Wales Politics Africa Asia China India Australia Europe Latin America Middle East In Pictures BBC InDepth BBC Verify Sport Business Executive Lounge Technology of Business Future of Business Innovation Technology Science & Health Artificial Intelligence AI v the Mind Culture Film & TV Music Art & Design Style Books Entertainment News Arts Arts in Motion Travel Destinations Africa Antarctica Asia Australia and Pacific Caribbean & Bermuda Central America Europe Middle East North America South America World’s Table Culture & Experiences Adventures The SpeciaList Earth Natural Wonders Weather & Science Climate Solutions Sustainable Business Green Living Audio Podcasts Radio Audio FAQs Video Live Live News Live Sport Home News Sport Business Innovation Culture Arts Travel Earth Audio Video Live Weather Newsletters Three things the Democrats have avoided so far at the DNC 21 August 2024 Share Save Anthony Zurcher North America correspondent, reporting from Chicago • @awzurcher Share Save Getty Images Thousands of protesters have demonstrated outside the convention’s security perimeter Modern political conventions tend to be slickly produced, carefully stage-managed events. And despite its struggles with staying on schedule and the unusual way its presidential nominee was chosen, this year’s Democratic gathering in Chicago has been no different. The Democrats on the convention stage have tried to put their best foot forward by talking about Kamala Harris’s qualifications and character, her plan for the economy and issues on which the party has broad public support, like abortion rights and healthcare. But what they don’t talk about – the issues and areas they have largely tried to avoid, at least so far – says as much about their electoral strategies and weakness as what they choose to highlight. Here are three notable omissions halfway through the party extravaganza. Analysing the Harris and Trump 2024 campaign ads Identity politics Four years ago, amidst the mass protests over the death of George Floyd at the hands of Minneapolis police officers, the Democratic Party – and the nation as a whole – engaged in a sometimes animated debate about institutional racism and how American history is presented. While many mainstream Democrats avoided the aggressive calls to “defund the police”, most engaged in the discussion of how America could take steps to address what they viewed as the corrosive legacy of slavery in the nation’s businesses, classrooms and government, including by promoting DEI - diversity, equity and inclusion More recently, the issue of transgender rights has been an animating force among segments of the Democratic coalition – particularly in the face of Republican efforts to limit or prohibit the ability of children to receive gender care. Follow live updates on this story 'Coach Walz' rallies Democrats with personal pitch to middle America Oprah Winfrey tells voters to 'choose truth' in surprise convention speech Democrats try to turn tables on one of their biggest weaknesses What young Democrats want Harris to do if she wins Neither topic has received much attention in the Democratic convention arena so far. There was an emotional tribute to the civil rights movement early on Monday that culminated in a wheelchair-bound Jesse Jackson – who marched with Martin Luther King Jr and ran for the Democratic presidential nomination in the 1980s – taking the stage. But DEI and other remedies have received short shrift. “DEI has become a dog-whistle code” used to undermine minorities in powerful positions, said Shavon Arline-Bradley, the president of the National Council of Negro Women, which is organising voter outreach efforts in presidential battleground states. “Our country was founded on opportunities for all men and all women, but we're not hearing that now, because a lot of people don't want to alienate a certain base of folk that are afraid of this.” At this convention, alienating the fewest number of potential voters has been the name of the game. And while abortion rights have been a daily focus at the convention, transgender issues – the other hot-button social topic currently - have been largely ignored in the programming that makes national television. Ms Arline-Bradley warns that by not talking about questions of equity and inclusion, the problems will linger. “We should talk about them, because this party is the most inclusive and diverse party,” she said. “Show it, activate it and live by those values.” Getty Images Some hot-button social topics have been largely ignored in the programming that makes national television Internal strife The last Democratic convention in 2020 was largely virtual – conducted in empty halls and television studios - due to the Covid pandemic. In 2016, when thousands of Democrats gathered in Philadelphia, the rifts within the party were on full display. Supporters of Democratic socialist Bernie Sanders, who finished second behind Hillary Clinton for that year’s nomination, repeatedly disrupted the proceedings and organised protests around the convention hall. The party was divided on topics like universal healthcare, free college tuition and, more broadly, whether Democrats should rely on support from deep-pocketed donors, big business and what Mr Sanders labelled the “corporate oligarchy”. Those divisions still exist. Mr Sanders gave a speech Tuesday night railing against the corrupting influence of money in politics. But his speech was immediately followed by Illinois Governor JB Pritzker, who bragged about being a billionaire, and venture capitalist and former American Express chief executive Ken Chenault. The big tent, at least for now, covered obvious differences of policy and opinion. Barack and Michelle Obama electrify Democrats Day three of Democratic Convention features party's rising stars What young Democrats want Harris to do if she wins Another current area of sharp divide within the party is US military support for Israel amidst the ongoing war in Gaza. Thousands of protesters have demonstrated outside the convention’s security perimeter, but the intense disagreements have received little attention inside the convention hall. Mr Sanders received applause when he called for an immediate ceasefire in Gaza, and Joe Biden turned some heads when he said in his speech on Monday that protesters “have a point” when they say there have been too many civilian deaths. But all this is a far cry from 2016, when some antiwar convention attendees booed former four-star General John Allen and former Secretary of Defence and CIA Director Leon Panetta during their speeches. Immigration Ever since undocumented crossings at the US-Mexico border surged early in the Biden presidency, the subject of immigration has been a liability for Democrats. Republicans have blamed the administration’s policies for encouraging the historic rise in border incursions, and the flood of new arrivals – many of whom have been transported by conservative governors to populous Democratic cities – has strained public services. The Harris campaign appears to recognise her vulnerability on the issue. One of its first television adverts blamed Donald Trump for sinking bipartisan border-security legislation earlier this year and touted Ms Harris’s record prosecuting “transnational gangs, the drug cartels and the human traffickers” while she was California’s attorney general. But immigration appears to be an issue the Harris team would rather talk about in 50-second television adverts than from the stage in Chicago. The topic has got a few lines here and there, but compared to the 2020 convention – when Donald Trump’s hard line on immigration was a primary focus of attack – the silence has been conspicuous. Reports suggest this could change on Wednesday night, with some speakers due to address the issue. Watch now on iPlayer (UK only) Who Is Kamala Harris? More on the US election SIMPLE GUIDE: Everything you need to know about the vote ANALYSIS: Three ways Trump will try to end Harris honeymoon EXPLAINER: Where the election could be won and lost FACT-CHECK: Trump falsely claims Harris crowd was faked VOTERS: What Democrats make of Tim Walz as VP Kamala Harris Democratic Party US election 2024 US immigration Donald Trump United States Watch Barron Trump: Then and now Aged just 10 when his father first became president, he's now well over six feet tall, and goes to New York University. 20 Jan 2025 US & Canada Watch: Trump's 'golden age' speech in 82 seconds The US president spoke about his plans for the second Trump administration, as well as criticising the 'corrupt establishment'. 20 Jan 2025 US & Canada 'I Donald John Trump'... 47th US president sworn in Watch the historic moment when the 45th president is returned to power as he takes the oath of office. 20 Jan 2025 US & Canada Tech CEOs, celebs and presidents - who's inside Trump's inauguration Elon Musk, Mark Zuckerberg and Jeff Bezos were among those invited inside the Capitol for Donald Trump's swearing in. 20 Jan 2025 Thousands protest in Washington DC ahead of Trump inauguration Thousands of people joined in on demonstrations as the United States prepares to inaugurate its new president. 18 Jan 2025 US & Canada Biden gives warnings on climate and oligarchy in farewell speech The outgoing US president warned against power in the hands of the wealthy, the threat of the tech industry and climate change. 16 Jan 2025 US & Canada Watch key moments from Rubio and Bondi's confirmation hearings Trump's pick for US attorney general was pressed on claims of election fraud and pardons for January 6 rioters. 15 Jan 2025 Watch key moments from Pete Hegseth's confirmation hearing Donald Trump's defence secretary nominee was asked about his stance on women in combat and his alleged excessive drinking. 14 Jan 2025 US & Canada Watch moment Kamala Harris certifies US election result Harris, who Trump defeated in the 2024 election, presided over the event as required by the US Constitution. 6 Jan 2025 US & Canada A look at Trump's new top team... in 85 seconds Among the allies the president-elect has chosen to join his administration are contentious figures, including among fellow Republicans. 16 Nov 2024 US & Canada Trump names vaccine sceptic RFK Jr for health secretary The president-elect has nominated RFK to lead the Department of Health and Human Services. 14 Nov 2024 US & Canada FBI video shows moment man sets ballot box on fire The suspect used an “improvised incendiary device” to start the fire in Portland, Oregon, ahead of the US election. 14 Nov 2024 Why is Kamala Harris still asking for campaign donations? A week after losing the election, Kamala Harris's team are still appealing for funds. 14 Nov 2024 US & Canada What a Republican trifecta means for Trump's second term Republicans have won control of both chambers of Congress, yielding Trump limited congressional oversight for at least 2 years. 13 Nov 2024 US & Canada ‘Welcome back’ - Watch moment Biden congratulates Trump The president and president-elect shook hands as part of a long-standing tradition signifying the transfer of power. 13 Nov 2024 US & Canada What we can expect from Trump and Biden's meeting Given all the things they’ve said about each other, Joe Biden and Donald Trump’s meeting could be really awkward. 13 Nov 2024 US & Canada 'I think Putin believes that he knows how to play Trump' - John Bolton 'I think Putin believes that he knows how to play Trump', says Trump's former adviser John Bolton. 7 Nov 2024 Putin congratulates 'courageous' Trump on election win The Russian president says he was impressed by Trump's reaction to the first assassination attempt against him. 7 Nov 2024 World Watch: Biden urges Democrats to 'get back up' after Trump win The president addressed Americans from the White House for the first time since Donald Trump's election victory. 7 Nov 2024 US & Canada US voters on one reason Trump won... and why Harris lost After Donald Trump's decisive victory, we asked Americans what they think made the difference for each campaign. 6 Nov 2024 US & Canada More 7 days ago What is Doge and why is Musk stepping back? Tasked with reducing government spending and cutting jobs, the agency has faced legal challenges. 7 days ago Technology 4 Apr 2025 Laura Loomer: Far-right activist who met Trump before he fired NSC officials The conspiracy theorist reportedly urged Trump to fire several National Security Council officials, a claim denied by the president. 4 Apr 2025 US & Canada 24 Mar 2025 Meet Usha Vance, the second lady of the United States The Vances met as students, when they joined a discussion group on “social decline in white America”. 24 Mar 2025 US & Canada 11 Mar 2025 Indian Americans worried over US ties under Trump, survey reveals Indian Americans are optimistic about India’s future, but wary of US-India ties under a second Trump term. 11 Mar 2025 World 4 Mar 2025 JD Vance: The 'hillbilly' Maga loyalist who became vice-president The conservative from Ohio shot to fame writing about his hard upbringing and is now next in line to the US presidency. 4 Mar 2025 US & Canada British Broadcasting Corporation Home News Sport Business Innovation Culture Arts Travel Earth Audio Video Live Weather BBC Shop BritBox BBC in other languages Follow BBC on: Terms of Use About the BBC Privacy Policy Cookies Accessibility Help Contact the BBC Advertise with us Do not share or sell my info Contact technical support Copyright 2025 BBC. All rights reserved. The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites. Read about our approach to external linking.PolitiFact | Yes, police were 20.8 more likely to kill than be killed by a criminal in 2019 The Poynter Institute Menu Donate State Editions California Florida Iowa Michigan New Hampshire New York North Carolina Pennsylvania Texas West Virginia Wisconsin Issues All Issues Online hoaxes Coronavirus Health Care Immigration Extremism Taxes Marijuana Environment Crime Guns Foreign Policy LGBTQ+ People Donald Trump JD Vance Mitch McConnell Mike Johnson Joe Biden Media PunditFact Tucker Carlson Sean Hannity Rachel Maddow Bloggers PolitiFact Videos Campaigns 2024 Elections Truth-o-Meter True Mostly True Half True Mostly False False Pants on Fire Promises MAGA-Meter Biden Promise Tracker Trump-O-Meter Obameter Latest Promises About Us Our Process Our Staff En Español Who pays for PolitiFact? Advertise with Us Suggest a Fact-check Corrections and Updates Newsletters Donate Follow us The Facts Newsletter Sign up English Español Stand up for the facts! Our only agenda is to publish the truth so you can be an informed participant in democracy. We need your help. More Info I would like to contribute One Time Monthly Yearly Join Now Chris Larson stated on August 24, 2020 in Facebook post: Police are "20.8 times more likely to kill than be killed by a criminal." National Legal Issues Wisconsin Chris Larson Police clear a park during clashes with protesters outside the Kenosha County Courthouse late Tuesday, Aug. 25, 2020, in Kenosha, Wis., during demonstrations over the Sunday shooting of Jacob Blake. (AP) By Madeline Heim August 27, 2020 Yes, police were 20.8 more likely to kill than be killed by a criminal in 2019 If Your Time is short Statistics from the Federal Bureau of Investigation show that 89 U.S. law enforcement officials were killed on the job in 2019, 48 of them stemming from criminal acts. Also in 2019, police killed 999 Americans, according to a database from the Washington Post. Black Americans were more than twice as likely to be shot and killed by police than their white counterparts If 48 police officers were killed, and 999 deaths occured at the hands of police, that puts Larson’s claim on track. See the sources for this fact-check Widespread condemnation of police brutality has picked up once again after Kenosha police shot Jacob Blake, a 29-year-old Black man, seven times at close range as he attempted to get into his SUV late in the afternoon of Aug. 23, 2020. As Blake remained at a Milwaukee hospital, where his family’s attorneys say he is paralyzed from the waist down , protests developed in Kenosha and across the state. Politicians from both sides of the aisle have weighed in, including state Sen. Chris Larson, D-Milwaukee, who wrote this in an Aug. 24, 2020, Facebook post : "In 2019, 89 officers died in the line of duty. While every death is tragic, almost half (41) were accidental. That same year, officers shot and killed 999 people. Police are 20.8 times more likely to kill than be killed by a criminal. We must drastically reduce the use of deadly force in this country." Is he correct that in 2019, police were "20.8 times more likely to kill than be killed by a criminal." Sign up for PolitiFact texts Is he correct? This post was flagged as part of Facebook’s efforts to combat false news and misinformation on its News Feed. ( Read more about our partnership with Facebook ). Let’s break down the numbers. Police officer deaths vs. deaths caused by police, by the numbers To back up his claim, Larson’s office cited statistics from the Federal Bureau of Investigation on the number of law enforcement officers who died in the line of duty during 2019. According to those statistics, 89 officers were killed in such incidents last year. Forty-one of those officers were killed accidentally, the FBI says, most often in car accidents. That leaves 48 of what the FBI calls "felonious" deaths, which are deaths caused by criminal acts. Turning to the number of people killed by police last year, Larson’s office pointed to the Washington Post’s "Fatal Force" database , which since 2015 has been logging fatal shootings by on-duty police officers throughout the U.S. The Post tracks such cases by following local news, law enforcement websites and social media, submitting open records requests and verifying incidents with the police department in question. Featured Fact-check Donald Trump stated on March 17, 2025 in a Truth Social post Former President Joe Biden’s pardons of lawmakers on the committee investigating the Jan. 6, 2021, U.S. Capitol attack “are hereby declared void, vacant, and of no further force or effect,” because “they were done by autopen.” By Louis Jacobson • March 17, 2025 In 2019, 999 people were shot and killed by police, according to the database . In his Facebook post, Larson does the math: If criminal acts led to 48 officer deaths in 2019, and officers killed 999 people in the same year, that would make police approximately 20.8 times more likely to kill someone than be killed in a criminal act. The Post database breaks down another important data point: Black Americans are more likely to be shot and killed by police than white Americans. Black people account for less than 13% of the U.S. population but are killed by police at more than double the rate of white people Black people are killed by police at a rate of 32 deaths per million people, Hispanic people at a rate of 24 per million, and white people at a rate of 13 per million, according to the database. Our rating Larson said police are "20.8 times more likely to kill than be killed by a criminal." FBI statistics and a national database show that checks out: In 2019, police killed 999 people, and 48 officers were killed by a criminal act in the line of duty. We rate Larson’s claim True. Read About Our Process The Principles of the Truth-O-Meter Our Sources Milwaukee Journal Sentinel, "A Black man shot in the back, a viral video and civil unrest: Kenosha and the rest of the country are on edge after latest police shooting," Aug. 24, 2020 Milwaukee Journal Sentinel, 'He was not treated like a human that day': Family of Jacob Blake, now paralyzed, speaks out on police shooting," Aug. 26, 2020 Sen. Chris Larson, Facebook post , Aug. 24, 2020 Federal Bureau of Investigation, "FBI releases 2019 statistics on law enforcement officers killed in the line of duty," May 4, 2020 Washington Post, "Fatal Force: 1,019 people have been shot and killed by police in the past year," Aug. 25, 2020 Washington Post, "How The Washington Post is examining police shootings in the United States," July 7, 2016 Washington Post, "999 people were shot and killed by police in 2019," updated Aug. 10, 2020 Browse the Truth-O-Meter More by Madeline Heim Brad Schimel stated on February 6, 2025 in X, formerly Twitter: “Eliminate school choice” is on Susan Crawford’s agenda. By Madeline Heim • March 13, 2025 Social Media stated on February 18, 2025 in X, formerly Twitter: The Chicago Cubs owner is bankrolling Brad Schimel. By Madeline Heim • February 25, 2025 Common Cause stated on January 8, 2025 in News release: Wisconsin makes it more difficult for its citizens to vote than almost any state in the nation. By Madeline Heim • January 28, 2025 Ron Johnson stated on November 17, 2024 in TV interview: “There's never been a placebo-controlled study on childhood vaccines.” By Madeline Heim • January 2, 2025 Donald Trump stated on October 6, 2024 in Rally: “With your Democrat governor, you have some of the highest electricity prices and highest energy costs. It’s just about at the top in Wisconsin.” By Madeline Heim • November 26, 2024 Robin Vos stated on November 6, 2024 in News conference: “Every single county in America, every single county, Kamala Harris did worse than Joe Biden did.” By Madeline Heim • November 14, 2024 Climate Power stated on October 18, 2024 in Organization email: Says Eric Hovde “claims anyone who believes in transitioning to a clean energy economy is ‘smoking crack cocaine.’” By Madeline Heim • October 30, 2024 Tammy Baldwin stated on October 7, 2024 in Campaign ad: Says opponent Eric Hovde “just proposed cutting Social Security by 28%.” By Madeline Heim • October 21, 2024 Eric Hovde stated on September 16, 2024 in Radio interview: Says opponent Sen. Tammy Baldwin “gave our taxpayer money to a transgender-affirming clinic … that does it without even telling parents." By Madeline Heim • October 3, 2024 Wisco Project stated on September 16, 2024 in Social media ads: “If you make less than $100,000, Trump is about to raise your taxes. Currently, you’re taxed at 10% and then 12%. He would raise that to a flat rate of 15%.” By Madeline Heim • September 20, 2024 Donald Trump Jr. stated on July 17, 2024 in Speech: After being shot at a Milwaukee rally in 1912, former President Teddy Roosevelt “finished his speech and he kept fighting.” By Madeline Heim • July 18, 2024 Jon Stewart stated on July 16, 2024 in TV appearance: Milwaukee's Marcus Performing Arts Center – where 'The Daily Show' had been scheduled – “was originally located in the ‘soft perimeter,’ they called it, security-wise” but “was shifted, understandably so, to the ‘hard perimeter.’” By Madeline Heim • July 17, 2024 Tammy Baldwin stated on May 5, 2024 in X, formerly Twitter: “When I worked on the Affordable Care Act, I wrote the amendment that allows all young people to stay on their parents’ health insurance until they turn 26. Overnight, millions of young Americans got health care.” By Madeline Heim • May 17, 2024 Amanda Nedweski stated on January 22, 2024 in Wisconsin Assembly: "We have technology and medical advancements today that can tell you if you are pregnant the day after conception." By Madeline Heim • March 8, 2024 Heartland Signal stated on February 20, 2024 in X, formerly Twitter: Says Republican U.S. Senate candidate Eric Hovde claims he "understands the tragedy of children being trafficked through Central America because he owns three homes there." By Madeline Heim • February 22, 2024 Yes, police were 20.8 more likely to kill than be killed by a criminal in 2019 Clear Any Rating True Mostly True Half True Mostly False False Pants on Fire Full Flop Half Flip No Flip Any Speaker Any Date Range Last 3 Months Last 6 Months Last 12 Months 2025 2024 2023 2022 2021 2020 2019 2018 2017 2016 2015 2014 2013 2012 2011 2010 2009 2008 2007 Any Category X posts stated on April 6, 2025 in a post: Photos and videos show Washington, D.C., protests against White House adviser Elon Musk are “staged & paid — bussed in, scripted, clocked out.” By Grace Abels • April 11, 2025 Donald Trump stated on April 9, 2025 in remarks at a White House event: In 2024, “China made $1 trillion off trade with the United States.” By Louis Jacobson • April 11, 2025 TikTok posts stated on April 9, 2025 in una publicación en TikTok: “China cancela la venta de TikTok” y “a partir de finales de abril los usuarios estadounidenses tendrán que pagar una tarifa mensual obligatoria para seguir usando TikTok". By Maria Briceño • April 11, 2025 Donald Trump stated on April 9, 2025 in a memo: The 2020 election was “rigged” and Chris Krebs, former Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency director, “baselessly” dismissed “election malfeasance.” By Maria Ramirez Uribe • April 10, 2025 Donald Trump stated on April 8, 2025 in a speech: The U.S. is “taking in almost $2 billion a day in tariffs.” By Amy Sherman • April 10, 2025 Brooke Rollins stated on April 6, 2025 in an interview: “We had an agriculture export deficit that increased from zero when President Trump left to $49 billion” under former President Joe Biden. By Maria Ramirez Uribe • April 9, 2025 Donald Trump stated on April 9, 2025 in a Truth Social post: On enacting country-by-country tariffs April 9. By Amy Sherman • April 9, 2025 Ruben Gallego stated on March 24, 2025 in a podcast episode: Men “have the lowest college attainment rate ever.” By Claire Cranford • April 9, 2025 X posts stated on April 7, 2025 in posts on X: Says Kevin Hassett, National Economic Council director, said on April 7, “Trump is considering a 90-day pause in tariffs for all countries except China.” By Madison Czopek • April 8, 2025 Viral image stated on April 4, 2025 in a Facebook post: Video shows South African news outlet reporting Ukraine President Volodymyr Zelenskyy “purchased a controlling stake” in a mine. By Ciara O'Rourke • April 4, 2025 Load more Support independent fact-checking. Become a member! In a world of wild talk and fake news, help us stand up for the facts. Sign me up Offices District of Columbia 1800 I Street NW Washington, DC 20006 Florida 801 3rd St. S St. Petersburg, FL 33701 727-821-9494 People Donald Trump JD Vance Mitch McConnell Mike Johnson Joe Biden State Editions California Florida Iowa Michigan New Hampshire New York North Carolina Pennsylvania Texas West Virginia Wisconsin About Us Our Process Our Staff En Español Who pays for PolitiFact? Advertise with Us Corrections and Updates Newsletters RSS Feeds Recent Articles and Fact-checks Recent Fact-checks Suggest a Fact-check Follow us The Facts Newsletter Sign up Terms & Conditions Privacy Policy Copyright ©All Rights Reserved Poynter Institute 2020, a 501(c)(3) nonprofit organizationPolitiFact | Yes, police were 20.8 more likely to kill than be killed by a criminal in 2019 The Poynter Institute Menu Donate State Editions California Florida Iowa Michigan New Hampshire New York North Carolina Pennsylvania Texas West Virginia Wisconsin Issues All Issues Online hoaxes Coronavirus Health Care Immigration Extremism Taxes Marijuana Environment Crime Guns Foreign Policy LGBTQ+ People Donald Trump JD Vance Mitch McConnell Mike Johnson Joe Biden Media PunditFact Tucker Carlson Sean Hannity Rachel Maddow Bloggers PolitiFact Videos Campaigns 2024 Elections Truth-o-Meter True Mostly True Half True Mostly False False Pants on Fire Promises MAGA-Meter Biden Promise Tracker Trump-O-Meter Obameter Latest Promises About Us Our Process Our Staff En Español Who pays for PolitiFact? Advertise with Us Suggest a Fact-check Corrections and Updates Newsletters Donate Follow us The Facts Newsletter Sign up English Español Stand up for the facts! Our only agenda is to publish the truth so you can be an informed participant in democracy. We need your help. More Info I would like to contribute One Time Monthly Yearly Join Now Chris Larson stated on August 24, 2020 in Facebook post: Police are "20.8 times more likely to kill than be killed by a criminal." National Legal Issues Wisconsin Chris Larson Police clear a park during clashes with protesters outside the Kenosha County Courthouse late Tuesday, Aug. 25, 2020, in Kenosha, Wis., during demonstrations over the Sunday shooting of Jacob Blake. (AP) By Madeline Heim August 27, 2020 Yes, police were 20.8 more likely to kill than be killed by a criminal in 2019 If Your Time is short Statistics from the Federal Bureau of Investigation show that 89 U.S. law enforcement officials were killed on the job in 2019, 48 of them stemming from criminal acts. Also in 2019, police killed 999 Americans, according to a database from the Washington Post. Black Americans were more than twice as likely to be shot and killed by police than their white counterparts If 48 police officers were killed, and 999 deaths occured at the hands of police, that puts Larson’s claim on track. See the sources for this fact-check Widespread condemnation of police brutality has picked up once again after Kenosha police shot Jacob Blake, a 29-year-old Black man, seven times at close range as he attempted to get into his SUV late in the afternoon of Aug. 23, 2020. As Blake remained at a Milwaukee hospital, where his family’s attorneys say he is paralyzed from the waist down , protests developed in Kenosha and across the state. Politicians from both sides of the aisle have weighed in, including state Sen. Chris Larson, D-Milwaukee, who wrote this in an Aug. 24, 2020, Facebook post : "In 2019, 89 officers died in the line of duty. While every death is tragic, almost half (41) were accidental. That same year, officers shot and killed 999 people. Police are 20.8 times more likely to kill than be killed by a criminal. We must drastically reduce the use of deadly force in this country." Is he correct that in 2019, police were "20.8 times more likely to kill than be killed by a criminal." Sign up for PolitiFact texts Is he correct? This post was flagged as part of Facebook’s efforts to combat false news and misinformation on its News Feed. ( Read more about our partnership with Facebook ). Let’s break down the numbers. Police officer deaths vs. deaths caused by police, by the numbers To back up his claim, Larson’s office cited statistics from the Federal Bureau of Investigation on the number of law enforcement officers who died in the line of duty during 2019. According to those statistics, 89 officers were killed in such incidents last year. Forty-one of those officers were killed accidentally, the FBI says, most often in car accidents. That leaves 48 of what the FBI calls "felonious" deaths, which are deaths caused by criminal acts. Turning to the number of people killed by police last year, Larson’s office pointed to the Washington Post’s "Fatal Force" database , which since 2015 has been logging fatal shootings by on-duty police officers throughout the U.S. The Post tracks such cases by following local news, law enforcement websites and social media, submitting open records requests and verifying incidents with the police department in question. Featured Fact-check Donald Trump stated on March 17, 2025 in a Truth Social post Former President Joe Biden’s pardons of lawmakers on the committee investigating the Jan. 6, 2021, U.S. Capitol attack “are hereby declared void, vacant, and of no further force or effect,” because “they were done by autopen.” By Louis Jacobson • March 17, 2025 In 2019, 999 people were shot and killed by police, according to the database . In his Facebook post, Larson does the math: If criminal acts led to 48 officer deaths in 2019, and officers killed 999 people in the same year, that would make police approximately 20.8 times more likely to kill someone than be killed in a criminal act. The Post database breaks down another important data point: Black Americans are more likely to be shot and killed by police than white Americans. Black people account for less than 13% of the U.S. population but are killed by police at more than double the rate of white people Black people are killed by police at a rate of 32 deaths per million people, Hispanic people at a rate of 24 per million, and white people at a rate of 13 per million, according to the database. Our rating Larson said police are "20.8 times more likely to kill than be killed by a criminal." FBI statistics and a national database show that checks out: In 2019, police killed 999 people, and 48 officers were killed by a criminal act in the line of duty. We rate Larson’s claim True. Read About Our Process The Principles of the Truth-O-Meter Our Sources Milwaukee Journal Sentinel, "A Black man shot in the back, a viral video and civil unrest: Kenosha and the rest of the country are on edge after latest police shooting," Aug. 24, 2020 Milwaukee Journal Sentinel, 'He was not treated like a human that day': Family of Jacob Blake, now paralyzed, speaks out on police shooting," Aug. 26, 2020 Sen. Chris Larson, Facebook post , Aug. 24, 2020 Federal Bureau of Investigation, "FBI releases 2019 statistics on law enforcement officers killed in the line of duty," May 4, 2020 Washington Post, "Fatal Force: 1,019 people have been shot and killed by police in the past year," Aug. 25, 2020 Washington Post, "How The Washington Post is examining police shootings in the United States," July 7, 2016 Washington Post, "999 people were shot and killed by police in 2019," updated Aug. 10, 2020 Browse the Truth-O-Meter More by Madeline Heim Brad Schimel stated on February 6, 2025 in X, formerly Twitter: “Eliminate school choice” is on Susan Crawford’s agenda. By Madeline Heim • March 13, 2025 Social Media stated on February 18, 2025 in X, formerly Twitter: The Chicago Cubs owner is bankrolling Brad Schimel. By Madeline Heim • February 25, 2025 Common Cause stated on January 8, 2025 in News release: Wisconsin makes it more difficult for its citizens to vote than almost any state in the nation. By Madeline Heim • January 28, 2025 Ron Johnson stated on November 17, 2024 in TV interview: “There's never been a placebo-controlled study on childhood vaccines.” By Madeline Heim • January 2, 2025 Donald Trump stated on October 6, 2024 in Rally: “With your Democrat governor, you have some of the highest electricity prices and highest energy costs. It’s just about at the top in Wisconsin.” By Madeline Heim • November 26, 2024 Robin Vos stated on November 6, 2024 in News conference: “Every single county in America, every single county, Kamala Harris did worse than Joe Biden did.” By Madeline Heim • November 14, 2024 Climate Power stated on October 18, 2024 in Organization email: Says Eric Hovde “claims anyone who believes in transitioning to a clean energy economy is ‘smoking crack cocaine.’” By Madeline Heim • October 30, 2024 Tammy Baldwin stated on October 7, 2024 in Campaign ad: Says opponent Eric Hovde “just proposed cutting Social Security by 28%.” By Madeline Heim • October 21, 2024 Eric Hovde stated on September 16, 2024 in Radio interview: Says opponent Sen. Tammy Baldwin “gave our taxpayer money to a transgender-affirming clinic … that does it without even telling parents." By Madeline Heim • October 3, 2024 Wisco Project stated on September 16, 2024 in Social media ads: “If you make less than $100,000, Trump is about to raise your taxes. Currently, you’re taxed at 10% and then 12%. He would raise that to a flat rate of 15%.” By Madeline Heim • September 20, 2024 Donald Trump Jr. stated on July 17, 2024 in Speech: After being shot at a Milwaukee rally in 1912, former President Teddy Roosevelt “finished his speech and he kept fighting.” By Madeline Heim • July 18, 2024 Jon Stewart stated on July 16, 2024 in TV appearance: Milwaukee's Marcus Performing Arts Center – where 'The Daily Show' had been scheduled – “was originally located in the ‘soft perimeter,’ they called it, security-wise” but “was shifted, understandably so, to the ‘hard perimeter.’” By Madeline Heim • July 17, 2024 Tammy Baldwin stated on May 5, 2024 in X, formerly Twitter: “When I worked on the Affordable Care Act, I wrote the amendment that allows all young people to stay on their parents’ health insurance until they turn 26. Overnight, millions of young Americans got health care.” By Madeline Heim • May 17, 2024 Amanda Nedweski stated on January 22, 2024 in Wisconsin Assembly: "We have technology and medical advancements today that can tell you if you are pregnant the day after conception." By Madeline Heim • March 8, 2024 Heartland Signal stated on February 20, 2024 in X, formerly Twitter: Says Republican U.S. Senate candidate Eric Hovde claims he "understands the tragedy of children being trafficked through Central America because he owns three homes there." By Madeline Heim • February 22, 2024 Yes, police were 20.8 more likely to kill than be killed by a criminal in 2019 Clear Any Rating True Mostly True Half True Mostly False False Pants on Fire Full Flop Half Flip No Flip Any Speaker Any Date Range Last 3 Months Last 6 Months Last 12 Months 2025 2024 2023 2022 2021 2020 2019 2018 2017 2016 2015 2014 2013 2012 2011 2010 2009 2008 2007 Any Category X posts stated on April 6, 2025 in a post: Photos and videos show Washington, D.C., protests against White House adviser Elon Musk are “staged & paid — bussed in, scripted, clocked out.” By Grace Abels • April 11, 2025 Donald Trump stated on April 9, 2025 in remarks at a White House event: In 2024, “China made $1 trillion off trade with the United States.” By Louis Jacobson • April 11, 2025 TikTok posts stated on April 9, 2025 in una publicación en TikTok: “China cancela la venta de TikTok” y “a partir de finales de abril los usuarios estadounidenses tendrán que pagar una tarifa mensual obligatoria para seguir usando TikTok". By Maria Briceño • April 11, 2025 Donald Trump stated on April 9, 2025 in a memo: The 2020 election was “rigged” and Chris Krebs, former Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency director, “baselessly” dismissed “election malfeasance.” By Maria Ramirez Uribe • April 10, 2025 Donald Trump stated on April 8, 2025 in a speech: The U.S. is “taking in almost $2 billion a day in tariffs.” By Amy Sherman • April 10, 2025 Brooke Rollins stated on April 6, 2025 in an interview: “We had an agriculture export deficit that increased from zero when President Trump left to $49 billion” under former President Joe Biden. By Maria Ramirez Uribe • April 9, 2025 Donald Trump stated on April 9, 2025 in a Truth Social post: On enacting country-by-country tariffs April 9. By Amy Sherman • April 9, 2025 Ruben Gallego stated on March 24, 2025 in a podcast episode: Men “have the lowest college attainment rate ever.” By Claire Cranford • April 9, 2025 X posts stated on April 7, 2025 in posts on X: Says Kevin Hassett, National Economic Council director, said on April 7, “Trump is considering a 90-day pause in tariffs for all countries except China.” By Madison Czopek • April 8, 2025 Viral image stated on April 4, 2025 in a Facebook post: Video shows South African news outlet reporting Ukraine President Volodymyr Zelenskyy “purchased a controlling stake” in a mine. By Ciara O'Rourke • April 4, 2025 Load more Support independent fact-checking. Become a member! In a world of wild talk and fake news, help us stand up for the facts. Sign me up Offices District of Columbia 1800 I Street NW Washington, DC 20006 Florida 801 3rd St. S St. Petersburg, FL 33701 727-821-9494 People Donald Trump JD Vance Mitch McConnell Mike Johnson Joe Biden State Editions California Florida Iowa Michigan New Hampshire New York North Carolina Pennsylvania Texas West Virginia Wisconsin About Us Our Process Our Staff En Español Who pays for PolitiFact? Advertise with Us Corrections and Updates Newsletters RSS Feeds Recent Articles and Fact-checks Recent Fact-checks Suggest a Fact-check Follow us The Facts Newsletter Sign up Terms & Conditions Privacy Policy Copyright ©All Rights Reserved Poynter Institute 2020, a 501(c)(3) nonprofit organizationLower voting age, higher participation rate, claims Make It 16 | AAP News FactCheck Photos Press Releases About Support Us Menu Factual. Independent. Impartial. News Newsroom FactCheck Photos Press Releases About Support Us Contact Us FAQ Legal and Privacy Terms Of Use Follow us Facebook Apple News Instagram AAP FactCheck Latest FactChecks Resources How We Work Who We Are Contact Submit A Claim Share Facebook X (Twitter) Copy Link Download Follow Facebook Apple News Instagram Share Facebook x Copy Link Download Lower voting age, higher participation rate, claims Make It 16 George Driver August 27, 2020 Research in Austria and Scotland found more 16 and 17 year olds voted compared with 18-24 year olds. Image by Mick Tsikas/AAP PHOTOS AAP FactCheck Investigation: Did a greater proportion of 16 year olds vote in elections in Scotland, Wales and Austria than 18 and 20 year olds? The Statement "We've seen that with other countries like Scotland and Wales and Austria, where they actually have a greater turnout of 16 year olds voting, instead of, more than 18 and 20 year olds." Make It 16 representative Sophie Crozier, August 24, 2020. The Analysis A group advocating for New Zealand's voting age to be lowered to 16 claims the move could boost voter turnout among young people. The group Make It 16 has taken its case to the NZ High Court, claiming the current voting age of 18 is discriminatory and inconsistent with the Bill of Rights. When Make It 16 representative Sophie Crozier appeared on The Project on Three on August 24, she said changing the voting age would have a positive impact on youth voter turnout. (Video mark 22min 57secs). "And we've seen that with other countries like Scotland and Wales and Austria, where they actually have a greater turnout of 16-year-olds voting, instead of, more than 18- and 20-year-olds and I think that's because you're in your own safety bubble," Ms Crozier said. AAP FactCheck examined Ms Crozier's statement that voter turnout was higher among 16-year-olds compared with 18- and 20-year-olds in elections in Scotland, Wales and Austria. In 2007, Austria became the first country in the European Union to lower the voting age to 16 for all national elections. In the 2020 book, Lowering the Voting Age to 16: Learning from Real Experiences Worldwide , University of Vienna researcher Julian Aichholzer reviews the research on the policy change in a chapter titled Voting at 16 in Practice: A Review of the Austrian Case . In total, three studies found turnout for 16- and 17-year-olds was generally higher than that for 18- to 20-year-olds in Austrian elections (page 4). One of those studies, titled Are People More Inclined to Vote at 16 than at 18? Evidence for the First-Time Voting Boost Among 16- to 25-Year-Olds in Austria , looked at two regional elections in Austria and found turnout was higher among 16-year-olds than 18-year-olds in Vienna. However, in the region of Krems, turnout among 16-year-olds was slightly lower than that for 18-year-olds (Figure 1 and figure 2, page 357). In both regions, 16-year-olds had a significantly higher turnout than 20-year-olds and the 16-17 age bracket had a higher turnout than the 18-20 age bracket (Table 2, page 358). In both cases, 16-year-olds also had a slightly lower turnout than the electorate as a whole (Figure 1 and figure 2, page 357). Aichholzer's report also included novel research, analysing data from five elections between 2005 and 2015 (page 6). It found 16-year-olds were estimated to have a higher turnout than 18-year-olds in all but one election, and higher than 20-year-olds in all elections. ( Figure 1, page 8 ). The report concluded the level of turnout was "generally higher among 16- to 17-year-olds (compared to 18- to 20-year-olds) and similar to the electorate's average (and here in particular amongst the 16-year-olds), as evidenced by official records from electoral lists." (page 16) The UK's All-Party Parliamentary Group on Votes at 16, which was set up to investigate lowering the voting age, published a report in 2019 which found turnout among 16- and 17-year-olds in Austria has stabilised at around 8-10 percentage points higher than 18- to 24-year-olds (page 15). Scotland first lowered the voting age to 16 for the Scottish independence referendum in 2014, and in 2015 it lowered the voting age for the Scottish parliamentary elections and local government elections . A UK Electoral Commission report on the referendum found the turnout of 16- and 17-year-olds was significantly higher than for 18-24 year olds. In total, 75 per cent of 16- and 17-year-olds claimed to have voted, compared with 54 per cent of those aged 18 to 24 years (page 64). This was based on a post-election survey of 1852 eligible voters and not the poll result itself (page 150). In total, 109,593 16- and 17-year-olds registered (page 1), which is an estimated 90 per cent of those eligible to vote based on figures from the National Records of Scotland , which show there were 121,657 16- and 17-year-olds in 2014. The Electoral Commission reports on the 2016 Scottish parliamentary elections and the 2017 local government elections did not include a breakdown of voter turnout in the 16-17 age group. However, raw data from a 2017 survey produced for the commission after the local government elections shows 51 per cent of 16- and 17- year-olds claim to have voted, compared with 39 per cent of those aged 18 to 24 (page 12). AAP FactCheck was unable to find figures for voter turnout among 16- and 17-year-olds in these elections. In Wales, 16-year-olds have not yet had the opportunity to vote. In November 2019, the Senedd Cymru/Welsh parliament voted to lower the voting age to 16 for the 2021 Senedd elections. Research in Austria and Scotland found more 16 and 17 year olds voted compared with 18-24 year olds. The Verdict AAP FactCheck found the statement that voter turnout was higher among 16-year-olds compared with 18- and 20-year-olds in elections in Scotland, Wales and Austria to be somewhat true. Research in Austria and Scotland found more 16- and 17-year-olds voted compared with 18- to 24-year-olds. However, Wales has only recently lowered the voting age for the Welsh parliamentary elections and 16-year-olds will not get the opportunity to vote until next year. Somewhat True - A part or parts of the claim are accurate but there is also a significant problem or inaccuracy. * AAP FactCheck is accredited by the Poynter Institute's International Fact-Checking Network, which promotes best practice through a stringent and transparent Code of Principles. https://aap.com.au/ Sources Fact-checking is a team effort Every AAP FactCheck article is the result of a meticulous process involving numerous experienced journalists and producers. Our articles are thoroughly researched, carefully crafted and rigorously scrutinised to ensure the highest standard of accuracy and objectivity in every piece. Who We Are How We Work Resources AAP FactCheck is an accredited member of the International Fact-Checking Network Related FactCheck Related AAP FactCheck Explore FactCheck Drag Joyce claims he’s Tamworth’s water saviour Manipulated TV footage used to spread false 'chemtrails' claim No, US tariffs were not retaliation for Australian hate speech laws Experts warn of 'problematic' power price comparisons Coalition's evidence doesn't show rules added $60,000 cost of building a home Transgender woman misidentified as pilot in Washington DC helicopter crash Related AAPNews Get to know AAP News Visit News ↗ Greens leader Adam Bandt loses seat in federal election Smoke, screams as neighbour recalls fatal house fire Justice plea as heartbroken family farewells slain son Tributes for trailblazer's turbulent time as top cop Accused panicked over woman's gassing death, jury told Daughter sobs as she recalls dying mushroom victimLowering voting age boosts long-term participation in elections | School of Social and Political Science Skip to main content logo image/svg+xml School of Social and Political Science Search Search button Search Home Study Toggle Dropdown Undergraduate degree programmes Postgraduate taught programmes Postgraduate research programmes Scholarships Meet us Student stories Prospective students Research Toggle Dropdown Research projects Collaborations Postdoctoral research Academic visitors Our research centres Our research ethics Research Explorer Inaugural Lectures Students Toggle Dropdown Undergraduate Postgraduate Development Hub Subject Areas About Us Toggle Dropdown Message from the Head of School News & Events People Centres Contact Staff resources You are here Home News & Events News Lowering voting age boosts long-term participation in elections Lowering voting age boosts long-term participation in elections 16 January 2023 Description Content Younger first-time voters in Scotland retain a habit of voting in elections and participate in greater numbers than older first-time voters, a study led by a School of Social and Political Science academic suggests. In the 2021 Holyrood elections, people under 30 who had been able to vote from age 16 went to the ballots in greater numbers than those enfranchised from age 18, the report found. Those who were able to vote as a 16 or 17 year-old were also more likely to continue voting into their 20s, researchers said. Studying voting habits from 2021 Scottish Parliamentary elections. A team from the universities of Edinburgh and Sheffield used voting habits from the 2021 Scottish Parliamentary elections to assess for the first time the long-term impact of Scotland lowering the voting age to 16 in 2014. The change was introduced for the 2014 independence referendum and then extended to Scottish local and parliamentary elections in 2015. Overall, researchers say the move has had positive long-term consequences for turnout. The boost was unrelated to whether people cast their first vote as a 16 or 17 year old in the independence referendum or in later elections. However, they found lowering the voting age had no longer-term effects on non-electoral forms of political engagement – such as involvement in demonstrations and petitions – or on addressing socio-economic inequalities in political engagement. When voting aged 16 or 17, the study found that socio-economic turnout inequalities were reduced and engagement in non-electoral politics was boosted, but these trends were not maintained as voters got older. Standard patterns of inequality re-emerged as people moved into their 20s, with those from higher socio-occupational classes more likely to vote. A lasting impact was found, however, for good civic education. Those who had taken classes in school where political issues had been discussed voted in greater numbers even as they grew older. Researchers surveyed 904 people aged 16 to 31 about their voting habits after the 2021 Scottish Parliament elections. They compared results from young people who could vote at 16 in the referendum on Scottish independence in 2014 and Scottish Parliament elections in 2016 or 2021 to young people whose first vote was at 18 in general, local or Scottish Parliament elections since 2010. A case for enfranchising younger voters across the UK Dr Jan Eichhorn, of the University of Edinburgh’s School of Social and Political Science, lead author of the study said: “Allowing 16- and 17-year olds to vote was a good decision taken by the Scottish Parliament. Many younger first-time voters retain a habit of voting and participate in greater numbers than older first-time voters. The findings strengthen the case for enfranchising younger voters across the UK to improve long term voting behaviour. But more can be done. Making sure all young people receive great civic education that includes learning how to discuss political issues well, could help reduce persistent social inequalities in turnout.” Dr Christine Hübner, of the University of Sheffield’s Sheffield Methods Institute, said: “The data allows us for the first time to look into the long-term trends in voting in Scotland after 16- and 17-year olds were given the vote. This change appears to have disrupted the usual lifecycle patterns for political engagement, with the decline in voter participation during early adulthood years - the mid-twenties - being smaller for those enfranchised at age 16. This shows these young people not only vote in higher numbers, they continue voting at ages where voter turnout is usually at its lowest. The report clearly demonstrates that advocating for a lowering of the voting age to 16 for all gives more people the opportunity to benefit from engaging with politics.” Report recommendations The report makes five recommendations for governments to overcome some of these inequalities and encourage lasting change in democratic engagement among young people beyond the act of voting. These include strengthening access to political literacy in schools, encouraging young people to engage with politics, and providing opportunities for democratic debate across all age groups in places such as workplaces and educational institutions. The team says more research could be done to understand why lowering the voting age initially reduces inequality in voter turnout and engagement but fails to last, and how that could be addressed in the future. The report is published by the University of Edinburgh in cooperation with the University of Sheffield and the think tank d|part. It is publicly available online on the University of Edinburgh’s School of Social and Political Science website. Read the full report: Votes at 16 in Scotland 2014 - 2021 (PDF, 800k) Share News & Events News Events Full address Find us School of Social and Political Science University of Edinburgh Chrystal Macmillan Building 15a George Square Edinburgh EH8 9LD View on map Contact details Contact us Tel: +44 (0)131 651 3060 Email: sps.reception@ed.ac.uk Connect with us Follow us on Twitter Find us on Facebook Follow us on YouTube Follow us on Instagram Subject areas Subject area content Centre of African Studies Politics and International Relations (PIR) Science, Technology and Innovation Studies Social Anthropology Social Policy Social Work Sociology Useful links CMS Login MyEd Schools & departments The University of Edinburgh College of Arts, Humanities and Social Sciences The University of Edinburgh is a charitable body, registered in Scotland, with registration number SC005336, VAT Registration Number GB 592 9507 00, and is acknowledged by the UK authorities as a “Recognised body” which has been granted degree awarding powers. Unless explicitly stated otherwise, all material is copyright © The University of Edinburgh 2025. Terms and conditions Privacy and cookies Website accessibility Freedom of Information Publication SchemeWelsh elections 2021: Will 16 and 17-year-olds vote? Skip to content British Broadcasting Corporation Home News Sport Business Innovation Culture Arts Travel Earth Audio Video Live Home News Israel-Gaza War War in Ukraine US & Canada UK UK Politics England N. Ireland N. Ireland Politics Scotland Scotland Politics Wales Wales Politics Africa Asia China India Australia Europe Latin America Middle East In Pictures BBC InDepth BBC Verify Sport Business Executive Lounge Technology of Business Future of Business Innovation Technology Science & Health Artificial Intelligence AI v the Mind Culture Film & TV Music Art & Design Style Books Entertainment News Arts Arts in Motion Travel Destinations Africa Antarctica Asia Australia and Pacific Caribbean & Bermuda Central America Europe Middle East North America South America World’s Table Culture & Experiences Adventures The SpeciaList Earth Natural Wonders Weather & Science Climate Solutions Sustainable Business Green Living Audio Podcasts Radio Audio FAQs Video Live Live News Live Sport Home News Sport Business Innovation Culture Arts Travel Earth Audio Video Live Weather Newsletters Welsh elections 2021: Will 16 and 17-year-olds vote? 25 March 2021 Share Save Share Save Welsh elections 2021: Younger voting age welcomed by teens About 70,000 teenagers in Wales aged 16 and 17 will have the right to vote for the first time in the Welsh Parliament election in May - but do enough of this group know about it? Research published just before the first lockdown in March 2020 suggested young people in Wales had a "very limited" understanding of Welsh politics. Analysts from Beaufort Research spoke to 148 participants including 14 to 17-year-olds, disengaged adults and foreign nationals. Among the research it found there was: Lack of recognition over who was Wales' first minister Lack of understanding over what the Welsh government did Nevertheless the same researchers found that 72% of 16 to 17-year-olds did want the right to vote, compared with 12% against. And since then, the coronavirus pandemic has offered a whole new level of awareness of the differences in who makes the rules in different parts of the UK, with Google searches over the last 12 months in Wales alone showing how many more people tried to find out what specific rules applied in what nation. In February, polling by the Electoral Reform Society (ERS) and YouGov found 69% of 16 to 24-year-olds thought the Senedd elections were important - a higher proportion than in any other age group, except the over-65s. 'We pay taxes but couldn't decide who spends them' "From the age of just 16 you can legally give birth to a child and claim child tax credit, get married with parental consent, give consent to medical treatment that could change your life, join the Army, have an alcoholic drink with a meal, legally smoke cigarettes and the list goes on," said 16-year-old Georgie from Swansea. Georgie is looking forward to voting in an election for the first time And up to now, the BBC young reporter competition entrant added, "we even have to pay taxes, and yet we are prevented from electing the man or woman who decides how to spend them". "We still are being restrained from contributing to the choice of who is in charge of our country." Georgie believes there is a general lack of understanding about politics and wants more to be done to change this in order for younger people to play a more significant part in the UK political system. Who should I vote for? Compare party policies BBC Bitesize - Politics and democracy A really simple guide to the Welsh elections She feels more could be done in schools and colleges to educate people. "We need to understand how votes work," she said. "You need to be educated about the process of politics to be better informed and able to vote. "There's so many different perspectives and you have to hear the wider views," she added. "The debate that 16-year-olds should be allowed to vote has been around for many years, but now it is our turn to make it happen. "There are well over a million 16-year-olds alone in the UK, and one way of many ways to start is if we managed to get them to start and sign a petition - surely that would get us noticed? "That is the main point of this argument, to be noticed and have our say in our future. "I recently turned 16. I strongly believe that anyone who is not classified as a minor [16-year-olds are not] should be given the opportunity to have their voice heard in a legal manner and the only possible way in my mind is through gaining the right to vote." 'There's a stigma behind teenagers voting' David from Newport, is studying maths, business and physics. The 17-year-old said: "It's going to be the first official time we are going to be heard by the Senedd and people who want to listen to us. "You can't put a price on that." "You can't put a price" on getting your voice heard, David says He thinks "there's a stigma behind teenagers" when it comes to voting. "They are considered to be reckless, and people don't think they understand how the government and politics work, but there is a real drive for 16 and 17-year-olds to have a voice on ethical and social issues." He described himself as the "anomaly" among his friends because he likes listening to what politicians have to say. However, he thinks this is because "there's not anything in politics for young people". A year before the Senedd elections, young people were found to have a "limited understanding" For David, parties focusing on universities and bursaries is "not enough to make people talk about politics". He wants parties to focus more on education, particularly on apprenticeships and clearer curriculums, adding: "It [university] might not be the future that some young people see themselves going into." For those that are unsure about voting in the upcoming election, he said researching each party's manifesto will help people "truly understand what party is for you". 'It's our future just as much as it is anyone else's' Lisha, 17, from Wrexham, said 16 and 17-year-olds "deserve to have a say in what happens to us". "It's our future just as much as it is anyone else's," she said. However, she said a lot of her friends were not aware they could vote in the upcoming election, or do not fully understand what they would be voting for. Lisha says parties could do more to make politics more understandable for first-time voters "If the parties made more of an effort to make it understandable and promote it more, I think it would be better so more people my age would actually be interested in it." She wants to see parties consider the environment, equality and LGBTQ+ issues. The story of young voters in Wales so far Assembly grants vote to 16 and 17-year-olds Young people 'confused' by Welsh politics "It's clear people my age want to make a difference and voting is an incredible thing to let us be able to do that," she added. But Lisha stressed that politics needs to be made more accessible if parties want young people to "be more invested in our future". 'Voting allows us to shape our future' Joel, from Newport, is "excited" to be able to vote for the first time after turning 16 a couple of weeks ago. He thinks it is important because it "allows us to shape our future". Joel is continuing to educate himself about politics He said he does not "have the greatest knowledge of politics but more and more I'm looking into these things and what my vote would mean". Young people are increasingly being made aware of politics, with climate change and Brexit being talking points in school, he said. "It [politics] does come up, it's something you see in the news and something you're drawn to talking about. "I see adverts from parties on different apps like Instagram. "It helps in giving a greater understanding of what politics is and what it allows us to do." A really simple guide to the Welsh elections Welsh election 2021: Who should I vote for? Welsh Assembly grants vote to 16 and 17-year-olds The story of young voters in Wales so far 'Why shouldn't we be able to vote?' Young people 'confused' by Welsh politics How was first poll for young voters? Wales Welsh Parliament election 2021 Welsh Parliament Young people Related Wales' papers: Child 'thrown from ride' and 'bombshell new poll' 3 hrs ago Wales What's your Senedd constituency? 4 hrs ago Wales What does the Senedd do? 4 hrs ago Wales More 4 hrs ago How do you vote in the Senedd election? The voting system is changing ahead of next year's Senedd election - here's what you need to know. 4 hrs ago Wales 4 hrs ago The big changes coming to the next Senedd election The Senedd is approaching its seventh election since 1999 - but this one will be different. 4 hrs ago Wales 4 hrs ago Tories pledge tax cut if they win Senedd election The Tory's Senedd leader pledges to take 1p off income tax if he becomes first minister in 2026. 4 hrs ago Wales 1 day ago Youth job scheme to start after £100k pledge A partnership between a training firm and a youth charity will help youngsters in Wolverhampton. 1 day ago Wolverhampton 2 days ago Youth project aims to inspire boys and young men Emerge, in Leeds and Bradford, will create safe spaces for open conversation, organisers say. 2 days ago England British Broadcasting Corporation Home News Sport Business Innovation Culture Arts Travel Earth Audio Video Live Weather BBC Shop BritBox BBC in other languages Follow BBC on: Terms of Use About the BBC Privacy Policy Cookies Accessibility Help Contact the BBC Advertise with us Do not share or sell my info Contact technical support Copyright 2025 BBC. All rights reserved. The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites. Read about our approach to external linking.Voting at 16 in Austria: a possible model for the EU? Elcano Royal Institute Skip to content Elcano Royal Institute Global Presence Search for: CORPORATE PARTNERS PROGRAMME Subscribe ES EN ES EN Topics Globalization, development and governance International Security Democracy and citizenship Climate and energy Technology and economics Future of Europe Latin America China, the US and the new world order Challenges and opportunities in the neighbourhood Influence and image of Spain Specials Publications Expert Comments Analyses Policy Papers Monographs Reports Surveys Working Papers Newsletters Experts Elcano in Brussels Projects Events About Elcano Our mission and values Juan Sebastián de Elcano Corporate governance Board of Trustees Executive Committee Protector Partners Collaborating Partners Emeritus Trustees ElcanoNet Scientific Council Advisory Council Think tank networks Research Research agenda Action Plan Working Groups The Elcano team Talents and Elcano Alumni Network Transparency Annual Report Bylaws Finances Good practices Voting at 16 in Austria: a possible model for the EU? Share Analysis Facebook Twitter LinkedIn Email Link Home / Analyses / Future of Europe / Voting at 16 in Austria: a possible model for the EU? Voting at 16 in Austria: a possible model for the EU? Paul Schmidt Johanna Edthofer // Posted on 12 Jul 2018 Future of Europe Theme Austria has been the only country in the EU that allows voting at the age of 16 at all political levels. Could this be a future model for the EU? Summary For the past decade Austria has been the only country in the EU that allows voting at the age of 16 at all political levels. A year before the next elections to the European Parliament and more than 10 years after lowering the voting age in Austria, it seems useful to take a closer look at the Austrian experience. With an increasingly ageing society, energising youth participation seems an ever more urgent topic. Austria has not yet achieved the goal of a sustainably high and rising youth turnout, but the best way to make a path is to walk it. There is a positive trend becoming apparent as regards both political interest and turnout among Austria’s youth, but translating it into a sustainable higher youth turnout requires providing permanent curricular and extra-curricular support measures. In this context, the long-term commitment of educational centres and of political decision-makers and opinion leaders is important. Embedded in a long-term strategy, voting at 16 could be introduced into other EU-member states as well. According to both EU-wide and Austrian surveys, the younger generation are generally more pro-European than their predecessors. Still, especially young people frequently feel uninformed about the EU and European developments. European political education could close the gap, transforming the pro-European impetus of the next generation into a well-informed debate about the EU and the challenges ahead. Europe’s youth should have a bigger say in determining its own future. Analysis Introduction It is widely acknowledged that Europe is currently undergoing a dramatic demographic change. Declining fertility rates combined with a rising average life expectancy inevitably lead to population ageing and its attendant consequences for the Union’s economic, social and political systems. 1 Against such a background, youth participation becomes an ever more urgent topic. Europe’s ageing population poses a challenge not only from a demographic and economic point of view, but also from a democratic one. If no measures are taken, the older generation could soon be heavily overrepresented at the political level, with the younger generation having relatively little to say. A recent example is the referendum in the UK on its EU membership. If only those aged 50 had voted, the country would have remained in the Union. 2 One of the instruments to increase youth participation is lowering the voting-age. Twelve months before the elections to the European Parliament might be a good time for reflecting on the topic. Supporters point out that the early integration of young people in the political process leads to heightened political interest and knowledge. In the long run, this should have a positive effect on general voter turnout as well as in the representation of the interests of young people. Both factors are considered essential to a properly functioning democracy. On the other hand, critics warn that 16-to-17-year olds are not mature enough to take politically informed and well-considered decisions. 3 Lowering the voting age alone is clearly not enough to secure their active participation. The Austrian experience In 2007 the voting-age in Austria was lowered from 18 to 16 years in the course of a broader reform of the electoral law. Since then, at the age of 16 youngsters are allowed to vote in general, municipal, federal and presidential elections as well as in the elections to the European Parliament. 4 In that respect, Austria is definitely a pioneer in the EU and an interesting case study to examine. Malta is the only other country to have lowered the general voting age to 16, and that only recently. 5 More than 10 years after the change it is time to take stock. What are the empirical data on the early integration of young people into Austria’s political processes? And what conclusions can be drawn for other EU countries? Given the existing trends favouring a break-up in Europe, the debate about the direction of EU integration is becoming increasingly important. Lowering the voting-age and fostering youth participation in general are possible methods to give Europe’s youth a bigger say on the future of European integration. Drawing on Austria’s empirical experience, lowering the voting age could also be an option for other EU member states. This could be an interesting topic to discuss at the forthcoming Austrian EU Council Presidency starting on 1 July 2018. Ten years of voting at 16 in Austria At the 2008 general election –the first at the national level at which 16-year olds were allowed to vote– the reported turnout of first-time voters was 88%. This corresponds to the average voter turnout and indicates a positive starting effect. 6 At the next general election in 2013 though, the Austrian National Election Study (AUTNES) confirmed that first-time voters went to the polls far less than older voters. 7 The reported turnout of the 16-to-17-year olds was 63%, which is significantly lower than the reported general turnout of 80%. Furthermore, the political interest of first-time voters was also significantly lower than that of older voting groups. 8 Compared to the general election in 2008, the second general election in Austria yielded less euphoric results as regards first-time and younger voters. Both their political interest and their voter participation had declined. 9 Nevertheless, between 2013 and 2017 the political interest of Austria’s youth rose again. Whereas in 2013 only a quarter of first-time and young voters defined themselves as very or quite interested in politics, the figure more than doubled ahead of the general election in 2017 and their likelihood of voting also increases. 10 According to the AUTNES pre-election survey, an overall 86.9% of the 16-to-17-year olds were inclined to participate in the election. 11 One correlation seems obvious: voter participation of youngsters depends very much on their interest in politics. The more they are interested in politics, the more likely they are to vote. Nearly nine out of every 10 youngsters who defined themselves as very or quite interested in politics had the intention of casting a vote in the Austrian general election of 2017. 12 Austrian teens and their opinion of the EU The regularly conducted school surveys of the Austrian Society for European Politics give an idea of the young Austrian’s opinion of the EU and recent European developments. 13 According to these surveys, most young people perceive EU membership to be positive. Up to 67% of respondents are of the opinion that Austria’s membership is good” whereas 7% consider it bad and 26% neither good nor bad. The younger the respondents, the more EU-friendly their attitude: 75% of respondents under the age of 15 sympathise with EU membership, with only 5% regarding it as something bad. Among those aged 16 to 18, 66% sympathise with EU membership, while only 7% have a negative attitude. Among young people over the age of 19, 57% sympathise with Austria’s EU membership, while 10% see it as something negative. 14 Austrian youngsters also identify fairly strongly with the EU. A total of 83% consider themselves EU citizens, while this does not apply to 17% of respondents. The younger the respondent, the stronger the identification with Europe. Up to 89% of respondents under the age of 15 view themselves as EU citizens. Among the 16-to-18 age group, 82% do so. In the group of those aged 19+, only 76% of respondents perceive themselves to be citizens of the EU. Despite their pro-European attitude, youngsters are more interested in national politics than in developments at the European level. A total of 80% indicate they are interested in political events taking place in Austria. By comparison, only 57% of respondents are interested in European politics. Most of the Austrian youngsters surveyed believe the EU should play a more important role, with 58% indicating that in the future a greater number of decisions should be taken at the European level. The strongest supporters of common European decisions are again in the group of the youngest respondents: 64% of those aged under 15 support common European decisions. Among the 16-to-18-year olds, 59% do so. The support for common European decisions drops to 52% among age groups above 19 years of age. 15 According to these surveys, pupils in vocational schools are on average more EU-sceptical than their colleagues in grammar schools and in vocational schools with higher entrance qualification: 78% of pupils attending grammar schools and 67% attending vocational schools with higher entrance qualification consider EU membership good. In contrast, only 52% of pupils in vocational schools see EU membership in a positive light; 88% of pupils in grammar schools and 84% in vocational schools with higher entrance qualification feel they are EU citizens; on the other hand, only 74% of pupils attending vocational schools describe themselves as such. 16 European youngsters and their opinion of the EU Apart from various Eurobarometer surveys, the EU-wide study ‘What millennials think about the future of the EU and the euro’ gives some insight regarding the views on the EU of those aged 14 to 35. 17 The ‘young millennials’, aged 14 to 25 –about half of whom are still at school–, have a more favourable view about the EU and the euro than the ‘old millennials’, aged 26 to 35, who have already entered the labour market. Respectively 52% and 55% of the ‘young millennials’ are of the opinion that the EU and the euro are good. In the group of the ‘old millennials’, only 43% and 46% respectively regard the EU and the euro positive. The ‘old millennials’ are even more sceptical than the older generation, of which at least 46% and 49% respectively consider the EU and the euro positive. The ‘young millennials’ are also stronger supporters of the EU membership of their respective countries. If a referendum on EU membership were to take place, 63% of ‘young millennials’ would vote to stay in the EU, while 21% would vote to leave. Among the ‘old millennials’ 57% would vote to stay and 32% to leave. Generally, a high level of knowledge of the EU correlates with a positive attitude towards European integration. This also applies to the older generation: only 44% of elderly people who know little about the EU are in favour of staying. Among those who believe they have a high level of knowledge, 69% approve of their country’s EU membership. On the contrary, a high level of EU knowledge and approval of European integration are not linked among the ‘young millennials’. Although they honestly say they know less about the EU, they are still more pro-European than the older generations: 53% of them admit to not knowing very much about the EU, but 60% of those who feel uninformed about the EU approve of their country’s EU. Thus, the ignorance of ‘young millennials’ concerning the EU seems to make them generally more pro-European. On the other hand, the majority of the mostly already working ‘old millennials’ feel quite often disillusioned by the EU. Therefore, they are more often opposed to European integration than ‘young millennials’. The youth surveys of the Austrian Society for European Politics reach similar conclusions: the highest rate of EU scepticism can be found among pupils in vocational schools, who are already in first-time jobs. The hypothesis of the Bertelsmann/Delors-study ‘Ignorance is bliss’ corresponds to one of the main results of the youth studies conducted by the Austrian Society for European Politics: youngsters are positive about the EU and approve membership. The younger the respondents the stronger their pro-European attitude. On the other hand, their interest in European politics, as well as their level of knowledge about the EU, seems quite low. The EU is seen to be remote and complicated. The electoral analysis of the Brexit referendum also shows that approval of the EU drops with increasing age. Among those aged 18 to 24, 75% voted for the UK to stay. Among those aged 25 to 49, 56% voted to stay but in the age group of people over 65, only 39% voted to stay in the Union. 18 Concerning voter participation, there is a diametrically opposite trend: only 36% of youngsters (aged 18 to 24) participated in the referendum. Among those aged 25 to 34 the turnout was 58%. In the group of people aged between 45 to 54 the turnout was 75% and among people those older than 55 more than 81% participated in the referendum. 19 Conclusions Ten years after the reform of the election law in Austria, the aim of a continuously high voter participation of Austrian youngsters has not yet been fully achieved. The turnout of first-time and young voters is subject to fluctuations depending on different factors. The general election in 2008 saw a ‘first-time boost’ of young voter participation, which did not see a repeat in the subsequent general election in 2013. 20 The decline in voter participation between the general elections of 2008 and 2013 can be related to the fact that in the course of the second general election, politics, educational institutions and the media payed less attention to mobilising first-time voters. 21 Nevertheless, the data of the current Flash Eurobarometer European Youth suggest the beginning of a positive trend. Alongside Italy, Austria is ranked first in the turnout of young people aged 15 to 30. Up to 79% of young Austrian voters said they had participated in local, regional or national elections in the previous three years, the European average being 64%. 22 The increase in political interest among Austrian youth between the general elections of 2013 and 2017 could indicate the development of a ‘voting habit’ that might evolve due to their early integration into the political process. In the medium-to-long terms it is likely to lead to an increase in the general turnout. 23 In order to foster this trend, permanent curricular and extra-curricular accompanying measures and the provision of information could be of help. In addition, educational establishments, political decision-makers and the media should develop a long-term strategy to permanently integrate young people into the political process. The introduction of political education as a specific subject for all school types together with an adequate apprenticeship and in-service training for teachers in this field has long been recommended and should accompany these changes. Since the younger generation is on average more pro-European than the older one it would be beneficial for the cohesion of the EU if young people were to be integrated into the political process at an already early stage. Their positive attitude towards the EU should not be interpreted as naivety resulting from ignorance, but rather as juvenile enthusiasm. Educational establishments would be particularly well advised to close the information gap by providing adequate European political education. The intuitive pro-European attitude of the coming generations is an asset to enable well-informed and much-demanded debate about the direction of European integration. Voting at 16 together with the necessary supporting measures could be introduced in other EU member states as well. Austria would be well placed to initiate a dialogue on this topic in the context of its upcoming EU Council Presidency. Yet it is also the quality of information that matters. To enable a more inclusive European debate, the EU needs to be presented in a balanced way, emphasising its numerous advantages without ignoring current problems. The next generation should be given the appropriate tools to participate in the political process in all EU member states and particularly in the much-needed debate on the future of Europe and the challenges lying ahead. Europe’s youth should have a bigger say in determining its own future. Paul Schmidt Secretary General, Austrian Society for European Politics | @_PaulSchmidt Johanna Edthofer Analyst, Austrian Society for European Politics | @JohannaEdthofer 1 Berlin-Institut für Bevölkerung und Entwicklung (2017), Europas Demographische Zukunft. Wie sich die Regionen nach einem Jahrzehnt der Krisen Entwickeln . 2 Was hängen blieb und was nicht , ORF, and Alt überstimmt Jung , Süddeutsche Zeitung, 31/I/2018. Simultaneously, the Brexit referendum shows that especially young voters frequently do not participate in elections (see the more detailed explanation below). See Unfassbar niedrige Wahlbeteiligung junger Briten , WELT. 3 Sylvia Kritzinger (2014), ‘Ready to vote? Eine Betrachtung der Jüngsten Wählerinnen und Wähler in Österreich’, ÖGfE Policy Brief , nr 11/2014; and Ferdinand Karlhofer (2007), ‘Wählen mit 16: Erwartungen und Perspektiven’, Informationen zur Politischen Bildung , Bd. 27, Innsbruck-Bozen-Vienna. 4 Federal Ministry for Families and Youth (2017), ‘Voting at 16’ , 22/XI/2017. 5 At the beginning of March 2018 Malta became the second EU-member state to lower the voting-age from 18 to 16 years. In Germany, young people at the age of 16 are allowed to vote in municipal and federal state elections in some federal states. In Scotland, 16-year-olds can cast their vote in elections to the Scottish Parliament and this was also the case for the referendum on Scottish independence. Werner T. Bauer & OGPP (2017), ‘Wahlsysteme in den Mitgliedstaaten der EU & Wählen ab 16 in Deutschland’ ,, 28/II/2018. 6 Ulrike Kozeluh, Flooh Perlot (ISA), Steve Schwarzer, Martina Zandonella & Eva Zeglovits (SORA) (2009), ‘Wählen mit 16. Eine Post Election Study zur Nationalratswahl 2008’, Befragung-Fokusgruppen-Tiefeninterviews, Vienna. 7 In the context of the Austrian National Election Study (AUTNES), a team of scientists from the Viennese Institute of Political Science analysed the Austrian general elections since 2009. Among other issues, the focus was on the voter participation of first-time and young voters. Based on pre- and post-election surveys, empirical data about the electoral behaviour, political interest and reported voter turnout of this age group was collected in the course of the Austrian general elections of 2008, 2013 and 2017. 8 Sylvia Kritzinger, Eva Zeglovits & Patricia Oberluggauer (2013), ‘Wählen mit 16 bei der Nationalratswahl 2013’, Vienna. 9 Ibid . 10 Sylvia Krytzinger, Markus Wagner & Josef Glavanovits (2017), ‘ErstwählerInnen bei der Nationalratswahl 2017’, Vienna. 11 Ibid . 12 Ibid . 13 On behalf of the Austrian Society for European Politics, the Sozialwissenschaftliche Studiengesellschaft (SWS) conducted four non-representative youth surveys from September 2013 to June 2017 (total sample: 10.767 pupils aged 15 to 19): youth survey 2014 (September 2013-May 2014, n=4.278); youth survey 2015 (September 2014-April 2015, n=2.267); youth survey 2016 (September 2015-June 2016, n=1.712); and youth survey 2017 (September 2016-June 2017, n=2.510). 14 The following percentage rates were taken from the most current youth survey (2017). Nevertheless, the trend reflected by these figures can be found in all four youth surveys. 15 Youth survey 2016. 16 Youth survey 2017. The trend can be found in the four other youth-surveys as well. 17 Anna Auf dem Brinke, Katharina Gnath & Philipp Ständer (2016), ‘What millennials think about the future of the EU and the euro’, Jacques Delors Institut Berlin, Bertelsmann Stiftung. The study is based on an opinion survey comprising a total of 10.992 people aged 14 to 65 (April 2016). The sample was split into three different groups: the ‘young millennials’ (aged 14 to 25, n=2.413), approximately half of them still attending school; the ‘old millennials’ (26 to 35, n=2.455), most of them already working; and the ‘older generation’ (36 to 65, n=6.124) as a comparison group. 18 See Was hängen blieb und was nicht , ORF, and Alt überstimmt Jung , Süddeutsche Zeitung, 31/I/2018. 19 Ibid . 20 Jan Eichhorn (2017), ‘Beyond anecdotes on lowering the voting age: new evidence from Scotland’ , LSE Blog, 2/II/2018. 21 Sylvia Kritzinger, Eva Zeglovits & Patricia Oberluggauer (2013), ‘Wählen mit 16 bei der Nationalratswahl 2013’, Vienna. 22 European Commission (2017), ‘European Youth Report 2018’, Flash Eurobarometer 455, September. 23 Sylvia Kritzinger (2014), op. cit . Share this article Downloads Files attached to this Elcano content ARI88 2018 Schmidt Edthofer Voting 16 Austria possible model EU (.pdf) Newsletter Receive the latest news by email Subscribe me Related articles The EU in a new geopolitical world order By Kathleen R. McNamara // Posted on 28 Apr 2025 Policy Dialogue ‘Trade, geopolitics and the EU’s global role in an era of uncertainty’ // Posted on 24 Apr 2025 Post navigation Previous Catalonia is not Scotland, despite appearances Next Europe should not be betting against Trump Written by Paul Schmidt Written by Johanna Edthofer Contact Legal notice Privacy Policy & Cookies Credits FAQs Accessibility Jobs Follow us on social media: Previous Catalonia is not Scotland, despite appearances // Posted on 11 Jul 2018 Next Europe should not be betting against Trump // Posted on 24 Jul 2018 Manage Cookie Consent To provide the best experiences, we use technologies such as cookies to store and/or access device information. Consenting to these technologies will allow us to process data such as browsing behavior or unique IDs on this site. Not consenting, or withdrawing consent, may adversely affect certain features and functions.. Functional Functional Always active The technical storage or access is strictly necessary for the legitimate purpose of enabling the use of a specific service explicitly requested by the subscriber or user, or for the sole purpose of carrying out the transmission of a communication over an electronic communications network. Preferencias Preferencias El almacenamiento o acceso técnico es necesario para la finalidad legítima de almacenar preferencias no solicitadas por el abonado o usuario. Statistics Statistics The technical storage or access that is used exclusively for statistical purposes. El almacenamiento o acceso técnico que se utiliza exclusivamente con fines estadísticos anónimos. Sin un requerimiento, el cumplimiento voluntario por parte de tu Proveedor de servicios de Internet, o los registros adicionales de un tercero, la información almacenada o recuperada sólo para este propósito no se puede utilizar para identificarte. Marketing Marketing The technical storage or access is necessary to create user profiles to send advertising, or to track the user on a website or on several websites for similar marketing purposes. Manage options Manage services Manage {vendor_count} vendors Read more about these purposes Allow Refuse View settings Save cookie settings View settings {title} {title} {title} Manage ConsentExtending the voting age to 16 – Electoral Reform Society – ERS Skip to content ERS Scotland ERS N.Ireland ERS Cymru I'm looking for... Search for: Search Who We Are Our Team What We Stand For How we’re creating change Governance and Performance Work at the ERS Contact Us Voting Systems Types of Voting System Single Transferable Vote First Past the Post Campaigns Electoral Reform in Westminster Replace the House of Lords England’s Local Democracy Extending the voting age to 16 Voter ID Take Action Add Your Name Write to Your Representative Support the Society Membership Make a Donation Events Subscribe to Latest News Our Achievements Latest News and Research News and Comment Press Office Publications Briefings Menu Menu Search Who We Are Our Team What We Stand For How we’re creating change Governance and Performance Work at the ERS Contact Us Voting Systems Types of Voting System Single Transferable Vote First Past the Post Campaigns Electoral Reform in Westminster Replace the House of Lords England’s Local Democracy Extending the voting age to 16 Voter ID Take Action Add Your Name Write to Your Representative Support the Society Membership Make a Donation Events Subscribe to Latest News Our Achievements Latest News and Research News and Comment Press Office Publications Briefings ERS Scotland ERS N.Ireland ERS Cymru Home > Campaigns > Extending the voting age to 16 < Campaigns Extending the voting age to 16 Scottish and Welsh 16 and 17-year-olds can vote while their peers across the border are still disenfranchised. Extend the franchise Sign Now > What’s the issue? Young people are less likely to to vote than older people, and if you don’t vote, you are less likely to vote in future. There is a real danger that 18 year olds who don’t vote now, will become 50 year olds who don’t vote in the future. We need to break this cycle, and the evidence points to extending the franchise as a way to do it. Extending the franchise is vital to nurturing more active citizens for the future health of our democracy. Why 16 and 17? The way people come into contact with politics in their formative years is crucially important for the future of our democracy . When they can vote, 16 and 17 year olds have higher rates of turnout than 18 to 24 year-olds – with 75% voting and 97% saying they would vote in future elections. They accessed more information from a wider variety of sources than any other age group. If you vote, you are more likely to vote in future. So as 18 year olds who don’t vote become 50 year olds who don’t vote, 16 and 17 year olds who do vote will continue to vote as they age. Extending the right to vote would allow a seamless transition from learning about voting to putting it into practice. We have already potentially lost one generation. We cannot deny the first generation of voters who have studied our democracy the right to use this knowledge in a General Election. That’s a missed opportunity. Who supports extending the right to vote 16? 16 and 17 year olds in Scotland and Wales can vote for their members of the Scottish and Welsh Parliaments, as well as their local councillors. Yet Westminster denies 16 and 17 year olds who voted for their MSPs or MSs a voice in electing their local MP. Where people see votes at 16 in action, they don’t want to go back. In Scotland around a third of adults supported votes at 16 before its introduction, now they have experienced it, 60 per cent back the idea . Even former opponents, like the former leader of the Scottish Conservatives, Ruth Davidson, are “fully paid-up members of the ‘votes at 16’ club” . Where can 16 year olds vote? 16 and 17 year olds can vote in national and local elections in Scotland and Wales. But the lack of movement on this issue in England is another wedge driven between the nations of the United Kingdom. 16 and 17 year olds in the Isle of Man, Jersey, Guernsey, Brazil and Austria also have the vote, as well as for some elections in Germany, Malta and Norway. Share Share Share Share Share Email 16- and 17-year-olds in Scotland and Wales can vote, so why can't they vote in England and Northern Ireland too? It's time that England and Northern Ireland caught up. Sign Now > More information about Extending the voting age to 16 Latest News See all news We should extend the vote to 16- and 17-year-olds, here’s why Votes at 16 Posted 02 Apr 2025 When was the voting age reduced from 21 to 18 in the UK? Votes at 16 Posted 27 Nov 2024 Publications See all publications Civic Duty: The Conservative Case for Votes at 16 and 17 The Conservative Party have much to gain by backing extending the franchise to 16 and 17 year olds. Read more > Welsh Power Report: Young People Whilst political disengagement affects all ages, the sense of disconnection from formal politics is most acute amongst young people. Read more > Briefings See all briefings Date published 02/11/17 Topic Debate Briefing on Votes at 16 Private Members Bill Issue Votes at 16 Read More Date published 28/06/17 Topic Briefing on votes at 16 Issue Votes at 16 Read More We need you on board to help make sure every voice is heard Join our newsletter > About the Electoral Reform Society The Electoral Reform Society (ERS) is an independent, non-partisan organisation leading the campaign for your democratic rights. Join the ERS Take your place among the ERS Members who support our work in parliament, in the press and online – for how we can fix Westminster's broken system. Join the ERS today > Join us online Facebook Twitter / X Instagram YouTube Accessibility Privacy & Cookies Contact Us Press Office A company limited by guarantee. registered in London, no. 958404. All content © 2017 Electoral Reform Society Website by Reason DigitalExtending the voting age to 16 – Electoral Reform Society – ERS Skip to content ERS Scotland ERS N.Ireland ERS Cymru I'm looking for... Search for: Search Who We Are Our Team What We Stand For How we’re creating change Governance and Performance Work at the ERS Contact Us Voting Systems Types of Voting System Single Transferable Vote First Past the Post Campaigns Electoral Reform in Westminster Replace the House of Lords England’s Local Democracy Extending the voting age to 16 Voter ID Take Action Add Your Name Write to Your Representative Support the Society Membership Make a Donation Events Subscribe to Latest News Our Achievements Latest News and Research News and Comment Press Office Publications Briefings Menu Menu Search Who We Are Our Team What We Stand For How we’re creating change Governance and Performance Work at the ERS Contact Us Voting Systems Types of Voting System Single Transferable Vote First Past the Post Campaigns Electoral Reform in Westminster Replace the House of Lords England’s Local Democracy Extending the voting age to 16 Voter ID Take Action Add Your Name Write to Your Representative Support the Society Membership Make a Donation Events Subscribe to Latest News Our Achievements Latest News and Research News and Comment Press Office Publications Briefings ERS Scotland ERS N.Ireland ERS Cymru Home > Campaigns > Extending the voting age to 16 < Campaigns Extending the voting age to 16 Scottish and Welsh 16 and 17-year-olds can vote while their peers across the border are still disenfranchised. Extend the franchise Sign Now > What’s the issue? Young people are less likely to to vote than older people, and if you don’t vote, you are less likely to vote in future. There is a real danger that 18 year olds who don’t vote now, will become 50 year olds who don’t vote in the future. We need to break this cycle, and the evidence points to extending the franchise as a way to do it. Extending the franchise is vital to nurturing more active citizens for the future health of our democracy. Why 16 and 17? The way people come into contact with politics in their formative years is crucially important for the future of our democracy . When they can vote, 16 and 17 year olds have higher rates of turnout than 18 to 24 year-olds – with 75% voting and 97% saying they would vote in future elections. They accessed more information from a wider variety of sources than any other age group. If you vote, you are more likely to vote in future. So as 18 year olds who don’t vote become 50 year olds who don’t vote, 16 and 17 year olds who do vote will continue to vote as they age. Extending the right to vote would allow a seamless transition from learning about voting to putting it into practice. We have already potentially lost one generation. We cannot deny the first generation of voters who have studied our democracy the right to use this knowledge in a General Election. That’s a missed opportunity. Who supports extending the right to vote 16? 16 and 17 year olds in Scotland and Wales can vote for their members of the Scottish and Welsh Parliaments, as well as their local councillors. Yet Westminster denies 16 and 17 year olds who voted for their MSPs or MSs a voice in electing their local MP. Where people see votes at 16 in action, they don’t want to go back. In Scotland around a third of adults supported votes at 16 before its introduction, now they have experienced it, 60 per cent back the idea . Even former opponents, like the former leader of the Scottish Conservatives, Ruth Davidson, are “fully paid-up members of the ‘votes at 16’ club” . Where can 16 year olds vote? 16 and 17 year olds can vote in national and local elections in Scotland and Wales. But the lack of movement on this issue in England is another wedge driven between the nations of the United Kingdom. 16 and 17 year olds in the Isle of Man, Jersey, Guernsey, Brazil and Austria also have the vote, as well as for some elections in Germany, Malta and Norway. Share Share Share Share Share Email 16- and 17-year-olds in Scotland and Wales can vote, so why can't they vote in England and Northern Ireland too? It's time that England and Northern Ireland caught up. Sign Now > More information about Extending the voting age to 16 Latest News See all news We should extend the vote to 16- and 17-year-olds, here’s why Votes at 16 Posted 02 Apr 2025 When was the voting age reduced from 21 to 18 in the UK? Votes at 16 Posted 27 Nov 2024 Publications See all publications Civic Duty: The Conservative Case for Votes at 16 and 17 The Conservative Party have much to gain by backing extending the franchise to 16 and 17 year olds. Read more > Welsh Power Report: Young People Whilst political disengagement affects all ages, the sense of disconnection from formal politics is most acute amongst young people. Read more > Briefings See all briefings Date published 02/11/17 Topic Debate Briefing on Votes at 16 Private Members Bill Issue Votes at 16 Read More Date published 28/06/17 Topic Briefing on votes at 16 Issue Votes at 16 Read More We need you on board to help make sure every voice is heard Join our newsletter > About the Electoral Reform Society The Electoral Reform Society (ERS) is an independent, non-partisan organisation leading the campaign for your democratic rights. Join the ERS Take your place among the ERS Members who support our work in parliament, in the press and online – for how we can fix Westminster's broken system. Join the ERS today > Join us online Facebook Twitter / X Instagram YouTube Accessibility Privacy & Cookies Contact Us Press Office A company limited by guarantee. registered in London, no. 958404. All content © 2017 Electoral Reform Society Website by Reason DigitalVoting at 16 in Austria: a possible model for the EU? Elcano Royal Institute Skip to content Elcano Royal Institute Global Presence Search for: CORPORATE PARTNERS PROGRAMME Subscribe ES EN ES EN Topics Globalization, development and governance International Security Democracy and citizenship Climate and energy Technology and economics Future of Europe Latin America China, the US and the new world order Challenges and opportunities in the neighbourhood Influence and image of Spain Specials Publications Expert Comments Analyses Policy Papers Monographs Reports Surveys Working Papers Newsletters Experts Elcano in Brussels Projects Events About Elcano Our mission and values Juan Sebastián de Elcano Corporate governance Board of Trustees Executive Committee Protector Partners Collaborating Partners Emeritus Trustees ElcanoNet Scientific Council Advisory Council Think tank networks Research Research agenda Action Plan Working Groups The Elcano team Talents and Elcano Alumni Network Transparency Annual Report Bylaws Finances Good practices Voting at 16 in Austria: a possible model for the EU? Share Analysis Facebook Twitter LinkedIn Email Link Home / Analyses / Future of Europe / Voting at 16 in Austria: a possible model for the EU? Voting at 16 in Austria: a possible model for the EU? Paul Schmidt Johanna Edthofer // Posted on 12 Jul 2018 Future of Europe Theme Austria has been the only country in the EU that allows voting at the age of 16 at all political levels. Could this be a future model for the EU? Summary For the past decade Austria has been the only country in the EU that allows voting at the age of 16 at all political levels. A year before the next elections to the European Parliament and more than 10 years after lowering the voting age in Austria, it seems useful to take a closer look at the Austrian experience. With an increasingly ageing society, energising youth participation seems an ever more urgent topic. Austria has not yet achieved the goal of a sustainably high and rising youth turnout, but the best way to make a path is to walk it. There is a positive trend becoming apparent as regards both political interest and turnout among Austria’s youth, but translating it into a sustainable higher youth turnout requires providing permanent curricular and extra-curricular support measures. In this context, the long-term commitment of educational centres and of political decision-makers and opinion leaders is important. Embedded in a long-term strategy, voting at 16 could be introduced into other EU-member states as well. According to both EU-wide and Austrian surveys, the younger generation are generally more pro-European than their predecessors. Still, especially young people frequently feel uninformed about the EU and European developments. European political education could close the gap, transforming the pro-European impetus of the next generation into a well-informed debate about the EU and the challenges ahead. Europe’s youth should have a bigger say in determining its own future. Analysis Introduction It is widely acknowledged that Europe is currently undergoing a dramatic demographic change. Declining fertility rates combined with a rising average life expectancy inevitably lead to population ageing and its attendant consequences for the Union’s economic, social and political systems. 1 Against such a background, youth participation becomes an ever more urgent topic. Europe’s ageing population poses a challenge not only from a demographic and economic point of view, but also from a democratic one. If no measures are taken, the older generation could soon be heavily overrepresented at the political level, with the younger generation having relatively little to say. A recent example is the referendum in the UK on its EU membership. If only those aged 50 had voted, the country would have remained in the Union. 2 One of the instruments to increase youth participation is lowering the voting-age. Twelve months before the elections to the European Parliament might be a good time for reflecting on the topic. Supporters point out that the early integration of young people in the political process leads to heightened political interest and knowledge. In the long run, this should have a positive effect on general voter turnout as well as in the representation of the interests of young people. Both factors are considered essential to a properly functioning democracy. On the other hand, critics warn that 16-to-17-year olds are not mature enough to take politically informed and well-considered decisions. 3 Lowering the voting age alone is clearly not enough to secure their active participation. The Austrian experience In 2007 the voting-age in Austria was lowered from 18 to 16 years in the course of a broader reform of the electoral law. Since then, at the age of 16 youngsters are allowed to vote in general, municipal, federal and presidential elections as well as in the elections to the European Parliament. 4 In that respect, Austria is definitely a pioneer in the EU and an interesting case study to examine. Malta is the only other country to have lowered the general voting age to 16, and that only recently. 5 More than 10 years after the change it is time to take stock. What are the empirical data on the early integration of young people into Austria’s political processes? And what conclusions can be drawn for other EU countries? Given the existing trends favouring a break-up in Europe, the debate about the direction of EU integration is becoming increasingly important. Lowering the voting-age and fostering youth participation in general are possible methods to give Europe’s youth a bigger say on the future of European integration. Drawing on Austria’s empirical experience, lowering the voting age could also be an option for other EU member states. This could be an interesting topic to discuss at the forthcoming Austrian EU Council Presidency starting on 1 July 2018. Ten years of voting at 16 in Austria At the 2008 general election –the first at the national level at which 16-year olds were allowed to vote– the reported turnout of first-time voters was 88%. This corresponds to the average voter turnout and indicates a positive starting effect. 6 At the next general election in 2013 though, the Austrian National Election Study (AUTNES) confirmed that first-time voters went to the polls far less than older voters. 7 The reported turnout of the 16-to-17-year olds was 63%, which is significantly lower than the reported general turnout of 80%. Furthermore, the political interest of first-time voters was also significantly lower than that of older voting groups. 8 Compared to the general election in 2008, the second general election in Austria yielded less euphoric results as regards first-time and younger voters. Both their political interest and their voter participation had declined. 9 Nevertheless, between 2013 and 2017 the political interest of Austria’s youth rose again. Whereas in 2013 only a quarter of first-time and young voters defined themselves as very or quite interested in politics, the figure more than doubled ahead of the general election in 2017 and their likelihood of voting also increases. 10 According to the AUTNES pre-election survey, an overall 86.9% of the 16-to-17-year olds were inclined to participate in the election. 11 One correlation seems obvious: voter participation of youngsters depends very much on their interest in politics. The more they are interested in politics, the more likely they are to vote. Nearly nine out of every 10 youngsters who defined themselves as very or quite interested in politics had the intention of casting a vote in the Austrian general election of 2017. 12 Austrian teens and their opinion of the EU The regularly conducted school surveys of the Austrian Society for European Politics give an idea of the young Austrian’s opinion of the EU and recent European developments. 13 According to these surveys, most young people perceive EU membership to be positive. Up to 67% of respondents are of the opinion that Austria’s membership is good” whereas 7% consider it bad and 26% neither good nor bad. The younger the respondents, the more EU-friendly their attitude: 75% of respondents under the age of 15 sympathise with EU membership, with only 5% regarding it as something bad. Among those aged 16 to 18, 66% sympathise with EU membership, while only 7% have a negative attitude. Among young people over the age of 19, 57% sympathise with Austria’s EU membership, while 10% see it as something negative. 14 Austrian youngsters also identify fairly strongly with the EU. A total of 83% consider themselves EU citizens, while this does not apply to 17% of respondents. The younger the respondent, the stronger the identification with Europe. Up to 89% of respondents under the age of 15 view themselves as EU citizens. Among the 16-to-18 age group, 82% do so. In the group of those aged 19+, only 76% of respondents perceive themselves to be citizens of the EU. Despite their pro-European attitude, youngsters are more interested in national politics than in developments at the European level. A total of 80% indicate they are interested in political events taking place in Austria. By comparison, only 57% of respondents are interested in European politics. Most of the Austrian youngsters surveyed believe the EU should play a more important role, with 58% indicating that in the future a greater number of decisions should be taken at the European level. The strongest supporters of common European decisions are again in the group of the youngest respondents: 64% of those aged under 15 support common European decisions. Among the 16-to-18-year olds, 59% do so. The support for common European decisions drops to 52% among age groups above 19 years of age. 15 According to these surveys, pupils in vocational schools are on average more EU-sceptical than their colleagues in grammar schools and in vocational schools with higher entrance qualification: 78% of pupils attending grammar schools and 67% attending vocational schools with higher entrance qualification consider EU membership good. In contrast, only 52% of pupils in vocational schools see EU membership in a positive light; 88% of pupils in grammar schools and 84% in vocational schools with higher entrance qualification feel they are EU citizens; on the other hand, only 74% of pupils attending vocational schools describe themselves as such. 16 European youngsters and their opinion of the EU Apart from various Eurobarometer surveys, the EU-wide study ‘What millennials think about the future of the EU and the euro’ gives some insight regarding the views on the EU of those aged 14 to 35. 17 The ‘young millennials’, aged 14 to 25 –about half of whom are still at school–, have a more favourable view about the EU and the euro than the ‘old millennials’, aged 26 to 35, who have already entered the labour market. Respectively 52% and 55% of the ‘young millennials’ are of the opinion that the EU and the euro are good. In the group of the ‘old millennials’, only 43% and 46% respectively regard the EU and the euro positive. The ‘old millennials’ are even more sceptical than the older generation, of which at least 46% and 49% respectively consider the EU and the euro positive. The ‘young millennials’ are also stronger supporters of the EU membership of their respective countries. If a referendum on EU membership were to take place, 63% of ‘young millennials’ would vote to stay in the EU, while 21% would vote to leave. Among the ‘old millennials’ 57% would vote to stay and 32% to leave. Generally, a high level of knowledge of the EU correlates with a positive attitude towards European integration. This also applies to the older generation: only 44% of elderly people who know little about the EU are in favour of staying. Among those who believe they have a high level of knowledge, 69% approve of their country’s EU membership. On the contrary, a high level of EU knowledge and approval of European integration are not linked among the ‘young millennials’. Although they honestly say they know less about the EU, they are still more pro-European than the older generations: 53% of them admit to not knowing very much about the EU, but 60% of those who feel uninformed about the EU approve of their country’s EU. Thus, the ignorance of ‘young millennials’ concerning the EU seems to make them generally more pro-European. On the other hand, the majority of the mostly already working ‘old millennials’ feel quite often disillusioned by the EU. Therefore, they are more often opposed to European integration than ‘young millennials’. The youth surveys of the Austrian Society for European Politics reach similar conclusions: the highest rate of EU scepticism can be found among pupils in vocational schools, who are already in first-time jobs. The hypothesis of the Bertelsmann/Delors-study ‘Ignorance is bliss’ corresponds to one of the main results of the youth studies conducted by the Austrian Society for European Politics: youngsters are positive about the EU and approve membership. The younger the respondents the stronger their pro-European attitude. On the other hand, their interest in European politics, as well as their level of knowledge about the EU, seems quite low. The EU is seen to be remote and complicated. The electoral analysis of the Brexit referendum also shows that approval of the EU drops with increasing age. Among those aged 18 to 24, 75% voted for the UK to stay. Among those aged 25 to 49, 56% voted to stay but in the age group of people over 65, only 39% voted to stay in the Union. 18 Concerning voter participation, there is a diametrically opposite trend: only 36% of youngsters (aged 18 to 24) participated in the referendum. Among those aged 25 to 34 the turnout was 58%. In the group of people aged between 45 to 54 the turnout was 75% and among people those older than 55 more than 81% participated in the referendum. 19 Conclusions Ten years after the reform of the election law in Austria, the aim of a continuously high voter participation of Austrian youngsters has not yet been fully achieved. The turnout of first-time and young voters is subject to fluctuations depending on different factors. The general election in 2008 saw a ‘first-time boost’ of young voter participation, which did not see a repeat in the subsequent general election in 2013. 20 The decline in voter participation between the general elections of 2008 and 2013 can be related to the fact that in the course of the second general election, politics, educational institutions and the media payed less attention to mobilising first-time voters. 21 Nevertheless, the data of the current Flash Eurobarometer European Youth suggest the beginning of a positive trend. Alongside Italy, Austria is ranked first in the turnout of young people aged 15 to 30. Up to 79% of young Austrian voters said they had participated in local, regional or national elections in the previous three years, the European average being 64%. 22 The increase in political interest among Austrian youth between the general elections of 2013 and 2017 could indicate the development of a ‘voting habit’ that might evolve due to their early integration into the political process. In the medium-to-long terms it is likely to lead to an increase in the general turnout. 23 In order to foster this trend, permanent curricular and extra-curricular accompanying measures and the provision of information could be of help. In addition, educational establishments, political decision-makers and the media should develop a long-term strategy to permanently integrate young people into the political process. The introduction of political education as a specific subject for all school types together with an adequate apprenticeship and in-service training for teachers in this field has long been recommended and should accompany these changes. Since the younger generation is on average more pro-European than the older one it would be beneficial for the cohesion of the EU if young people were to be integrated into the political process at an already early stage. Their positive attitude towards the EU should not be interpreted as naivety resulting from ignorance, but rather as juvenile enthusiasm. Educational establishments would be particularly well advised to close the information gap by providing adequate European political education. The intuitive pro-European attitude of the coming generations is an asset to enable well-informed and much-demanded debate about the direction of European integration. Voting at 16 together with the necessary supporting measures could be introduced in other EU member states as well. Austria would be well placed to initiate a dialogue on this topic in the context of its upcoming EU Council Presidency. Yet it is also the quality of information that matters. To enable a more inclusive European debate, the EU needs to be presented in a balanced way, emphasising its numerous advantages without ignoring current problems. The next generation should be given the appropriate tools to participate in the political process in all EU member states and particularly in the much-needed debate on the future of Europe and the challenges lying ahead. Europe’s youth should have a bigger say in determining its own future. Paul Schmidt Secretary General, Austrian Society for European Politics | @_PaulSchmidt Johanna Edthofer Analyst, Austrian Society for European Politics | @JohannaEdthofer 1 Berlin-Institut für Bevölkerung und Entwicklung (2017), Europas Demographische Zukunft. Wie sich die Regionen nach einem Jahrzehnt der Krisen Entwickeln . 2 Was hängen blieb und was nicht , ORF, and Alt überstimmt Jung , Süddeutsche Zeitung, 31/I/2018. Simultaneously, the Brexit referendum shows that especially young voters frequently do not participate in elections (see the more detailed explanation below). See Unfassbar niedrige Wahlbeteiligung junger Briten , WELT. 3 Sylvia Kritzinger (2014), ‘Ready to vote? Eine Betrachtung der Jüngsten Wählerinnen und Wähler in Österreich’, ÖGfE Policy Brief , nr 11/2014; and Ferdinand Karlhofer (2007), ‘Wählen mit 16: Erwartungen und Perspektiven’, Informationen zur Politischen Bildung , Bd. 27, Innsbruck-Bozen-Vienna. 4 Federal Ministry for Families and Youth (2017), ‘Voting at 16’ , 22/XI/2017. 5 At the beginning of March 2018 Malta became the second EU-member state to lower the voting-age from 18 to 16 years. In Germany, young people at the age of 16 are allowed to vote in municipal and federal state elections in some federal states. In Scotland, 16-year-olds can cast their vote in elections to the Scottish Parliament and this was also the case for the referendum on Scottish independence. Werner T. Bauer & OGPP (2017), ‘Wahlsysteme in den Mitgliedstaaten der EU & Wählen ab 16 in Deutschland’ ,, 28/II/2018. 6 Ulrike Kozeluh, Flooh Perlot (ISA), Steve Schwarzer, Martina Zandonella & Eva Zeglovits (SORA) (2009), ‘Wählen mit 16. Eine Post Election Study zur Nationalratswahl 2008’, Befragung-Fokusgruppen-Tiefeninterviews, Vienna. 7 In the context of the Austrian National Election Study (AUTNES), a team of scientists from the Viennese Institute of Political Science analysed the Austrian general elections since 2009. Among other issues, the focus was on the voter participation of first-time and young voters. Based on pre- and post-election surveys, empirical data about the electoral behaviour, political interest and reported voter turnout of this age group was collected in the course of the Austrian general elections of 2008, 2013 and 2017. 8 Sylvia Kritzinger, Eva Zeglovits & Patricia Oberluggauer (2013), ‘Wählen mit 16 bei der Nationalratswahl 2013’, Vienna. 9 Ibid . 10 Sylvia Krytzinger, Markus Wagner & Josef Glavanovits (2017), ‘ErstwählerInnen bei der Nationalratswahl 2017’, Vienna. 11 Ibid . 12 Ibid . 13 On behalf of the Austrian Society for European Politics, the Sozialwissenschaftliche Studiengesellschaft (SWS) conducted four non-representative youth surveys from September 2013 to June 2017 (total sample: 10.767 pupils aged 15 to 19): youth survey 2014 (September 2013-May 2014, n=4.278); youth survey 2015 (September 2014-April 2015, n=2.267); youth survey 2016 (September 2015-June 2016, n=1.712); and youth survey 2017 (September 2016-June 2017, n=2.510). 14 The following percentage rates were taken from the most current youth survey (2017). Nevertheless, the trend reflected by these figures can be found in all four youth surveys. 15 Youth survey 2016. 16 Youth survey 2017. The trend can be found in the four other youth-surveys as well. 17 Anna Auf dem Brinke, Katharina Gnath & Philipp Ständer (2016), ‘What millennials think about the future of the EU and the euro’, Jacques Delors Institut Berlin, Bertelsmann Stiftung. The study is based on an opinion survey comprising a total of 10.992 people aged 14 to 65 (April 2016). The sample was split into three different groups: the ‘young millennials’ (aged 14 to 25, n=2.413), approximately half of them still attending school; the ‘old millennials’ (26 to 35, n=2.455), most of them already working; and the ‘older generation’ (36 to 65, n=6.124) as a comparison group. 18 See Was hängen blieb und was nicht , ORF, and Alt überstimmt Jung , Süddeutsche Zeitung, 31/I/2018. 19 Ibid . 20 Jan Eichhorn (2017), ‘Beyond anecdotes on lowering the voting age: new evidence from Scotland’ , LSE Blog, 2/II/2018. 21 Sylvia Kritzinger, Eva Zeglovits & Patricia Oberluggauer (2013), ‘Wählen mit 16 bei der Nationalratswahl 2013’, Vienna. 22 European Commission (2017), ‘European Youth Report 2018’, Flash Eurobarometer 455, September. 23 Sylvia Kritzinger (2014), op. cit . Share this article Downloads Files attached to this Elcano content ARI88 2018 Schmidt Edthofer Voting 16 Austria possible model EU (.pdf) Newsletter Receive the latest news by email Subscribe me Related articles The EU in a new geopolitical world order By Kathleen R. McNamara // Posted on 28 Apr 2025 Policy Dialogue ‘Trade, geopolitics and the EU’s global role in an era of uncertainty’ // Posted on 24 Apr 2025 Post navigation Previous Catalonia is not Scotland, despite appearances Next Europe should not be betting against Trump Written by Paul Schmidt Written by Johanna Edthofer Contact Legal notice Privacy Policy & Cookies Credits FAQs Accessibility Jobs Follow us on social media: Previous Catalonia is not Scotland, despite appearances // Posted on 11 Jul 2018 Next Europe should not be betting against Trump // Posted on 24 Jul 2018 Manage Cookie Consent To provide the best experiences, we use technologies such as cookies to store and/or access device information. Consenting to these technologies will allow us to process data such as browsing behavior or unique IDs on this site. Not consenting, or withdrawing consent, may adversely affect certain features and functions.. Functional Functional Always active The technical storage or access is strictly necessary for the legitimate purpose of enabling the use of a specific service explicitly requested by the subscriber or user, or for the sole purpose of carrying out the transmission of a communication over an electronic communications network. Preferencias Preferencias El almacenamiento o acceso técnico es necesario para la finalidad legítima de almacenar preferencias no solicitadas por el abonado o usuario. Statistics Statistics The technical storage or access that is used exclusively for statistical purposes. El almacenamiento o acceso técnico que se utiliza exclusivamente con fines estadísticos anónimos. Sin un requerimiento, el cumplimiento voluntario por parte de tu Proveedor de servicios de Internet, o los registros adicionales de un tercero, la información almacenada o recuperada sólo para este propósito no se puede utilizar para identificarte. Marketing Marketing The technical storage or access is necessary to create user profiles to send advertising, or to track the user on a website or on several websites for similar marketing purposes. Manage options Manage services Manage {vendor_count} vendors Read more about these purposes Allow Refuse View settings Save cookie settings View settings {title} {title} {title} Manage ConsentWhat Trump has done in his first 100 Days on 14 major campaign promises IE 11 is not supported. For an optimal experience visit our site on another browser. Skip to Content NBC News Logo India-Pakistan Conclave Politics U.S. News Local New York Los Angeles Chicago Dallas-Fort Worth Philadelphia Washington, D.C. Boston Bay Area South Florida San Diego Connecticut World Sports Business Health Shopping Tipline Science Culture & Trends Share & Save — My News Manage Profile Email Preferences Sign Out Search Search Profile My News Sign Out Sign In Create your free profile Sections U.S. News Decision 2024 Politics World Business Sports Investigations Culture & Trends Health Science Tech Weather Video Features Photos NBC Select NBC Asian America NBC BLK NBC Latino NBC OUT Local New York Los Angeles Chicago Dallas-Fort Worth Philadelphia Washington, D.C. Boston Bay Area South Florida San Diego Connecticut tv Today Nightly News MSNBC Meet the Press Dateline Featured NBC News Now Nightly Films Stay Tuned Special Features Newsletters Podcasts Listen Now More From NBC CNBC NBC.COM NBCU Academy Peacock NEXT STEPS FOR VETS NBC News Site Map Help Follow NBC News news Alerts There are no new alerts at this time Search Search Facebook Twitter Email SMS Print Whatsapp Reddit Pocket Flipboard Pinterest Linkedin Latest Stories India-Pakistan Conclave Politics U.S. News World Sports Business Health Shopping Tipline Science Culture & Trends Donald Trump Here's what Trump has done on 14 of his major campaign promises NBC News tracked whether Trump has fulfilled his promises on everything from mass deportations, tariffs, ending DEI and banning transgender athletes from women's sports. Get more news Live on / Updated By Olympia Sonnier and Megan Shannon President Donald Trump has moved with remarkable speed in his first 100 days, issuing more than 100 executive orders and pushing an agenda that has the potential to rapidly remake America. The effort comes from some big promises he made on the campaign trail, among them to implement tariffs, carry out mass deportations and end major international conflicts. Here's a look at many of those promises and whether or not he has followed through: Promise: End war in Ukraine on or before Day 1 During his 721-day campaign, Trump consistently promised to end the war in Ukraine. At times, he even went as far as to add that he would end it in 24 hours. “Before I even arrive at the Oval Office, shortly after I win the presidency, I will have the disastrous war between Russia and Ukraine settled,” he told a rally crowd in Waco, Texas, in March 2023, adding, “I will have that settlement done within 24 hours.” In an interview on former Navy SEAL Shawn Ryan’s podcast in August, he said, “I will have that war settled when I’m president-elect, meaning before I get to office on Jan. 20.” Status: Failed One hundred days into Trump's second term, the conflict grinds on . In a recent interview with Time magazine, he claimed that his campaign rhetoric about the conflict was an “exaggeration and " was said in jest ." In one of the more memorable days of this administration, Trump and Vice President JD Vance berated Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelenskyy in the Oval Office, calling him ungrateful and saying he had “disrespected” the United States. Still, Trump acknowledged during the meeting that ending the war in Ukraine, which has been waged for over three years, would be “a very great achievement if we could get this war stopped and get them back to normalization.” Promise: End the war in Gaza Since Hamas terrorists attacked Israel on Oct. 7, 2023, Trump maintained that the attack would not have taken place had he been president at the time. Throughout the campaign, he kept in contact with Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu, even hosting him at his Mar-a-Lago estate in Florida in July. And on several occasions, especially when he was speaking to predominantly Jewish audiences, he promised he would “bring peace back to the Middle East.” “ We’re going to get it to work out ,” he told the Israeli-American Council in Washington in September. “I’m the candidate of those who want to defend Western civilization, defend Israel and defend the United States of America. When I return to the White House, we will quickly restore stability in the Middle East, and we will return the world to peace.” Status: Failed The beginning of 2025 showed promise; before Trump was sworn in, he dispatched his special envoy to the Middle East, Steve Witkoff, to work with President Joe Biden’s chief negotiator, Brett McGurk. A three-phase ceasefire deal was agreed to on Jan. 15, with Trump, then the president-elect, taking a victory lap. The deal lasted until March 18, when Israel launched a surprise attack on Gaza and Netanyahu announced that Israel had “ resumed combat in full force ” against Hamas. On April 7, during an event with Netanyahu, Trump indicated that the negotiators were close to a deal, saying: “Well, I’d like to see the war stop, and I think the war will stop at some point. That won’t be in the too distant future. Right now, we have a problem with hostages. We’re trying to get the hostages out. We got quite a few of them out, but it’s a long process. It shouldn’t be that long.” Thirty-three Israeli hostages and 1,800 Palestinians were returned during the ceasefire this year; 59 Israelis taken since the start of the Oct. 7 conflict remain in captivity. The Palestinian death toll since the start of the war stands at 52,243, according to the Gaza Health Ministry; the Israeli death toll is roughly 1,200 , according to the Israeli Foreign Affairs Ministry, and 251 people have been taken hostage. Promise: Close the border Immigration has long been one of Trump’s top issues in his campaigns. Throughout the 2024 race, he laid out various initiatives aimed at decreasing illegal immigration and the number of undocumented immigrants living in the United States. But largely, his agenda started with sealing the border — particularly the southern border with Mexico. Trump held more events focused on immigration than any other one topic, including the economy. At a rally in Aurora, Colorado, on Oct. 11, he said: “We will close the border. We will stop the invasion of illegals into our country. We will defend our territory. We will not be conquered. We will not be conquered. We will reclaim our sovereignty.” Status: Kept According to U.S. Customs and Border Protection, illegal crossings are at a historic low, having dropped from 211,896 in March 2022 to 8,193 in March 2025, a 96% decrease. Most recently, Trump took to Truth Social to highlight his accomplishment, writing , “THE SOUTHERN BORDER IS NOW THE STRONGEST AND SAFEST IN USA HISTORY. IT WILL REMAIN SO!!!” and noting “I beat my own record” at an event on April 22. Promise: Carry out the largest mass deportation operation in U.S. history Carrying out mass deportations was a cornerstone of Trump’s 2024 campaign, even though he never provided any specifics about how such an operation would be implemented or paid for. "I will send Congress a bill to ban all sanctuary cities in our country, including Denver, and we will begin the largest deportation operation in the history of the United States," he said at a rally in Aurora, Colorado, in October. On Oct. 27, just days before the election, Trump reiterated at a rally in New York City, “On Day One, I will launch the largest deportation program in American history to get the criminals out.” Status: Jury's still out While the administration did begin deportation operations almost immediately, Trump’s deportation numbers have been lower than those of both Biden and Barack Obama during the same period in their presidencies. But that is largely because the number of border encounters has been significantly lower. Trump has sent men alleged to be members of the Venezuelan criminal organization Tren de Aragua to a prison in El Salvador. El Salvador's Presidency Press Office / AFP - Getty Images file According to Trump’s border “czar,” Tom Homan, the administration had deported about 139,000 people as of Monday. Trump also faces multiple legal challenges to his deportation orders, many of which have been stayed by the Supreme Court or other federal courts. Homan told NBC News on Monday that he needs more funding from Congress to carry out Trump’s vision. “We need more, more money for beds. We need more money for more officers. We need more money for contractors that come in and do nonenforcement jobs and release the law enforcement officers to the street. We need more plane flights. So Congress needs to come through and fund us to keep President Trump’s promise to the American people,” he said. Promise: End birthright citizenship In 2023, Trump put out a video proposing to end birthright citizenship and ban what he called “birth tourism.” “On Day One of my new term in office,” he promised, “I will sign an executive order making clear to federal agencies that under the correct interpretation of the law, going forward, the future children of illegal aliens will not receive automatic U.S. citizenship.” Status: Jury's still out Trump signed an executive order ending birthright citizenship on his first day in office. But the order almost immediately faced legal challenges, three of which have made it to the Supreme Court. Arguments will be presented May 15. Trump has expressed confidence that the order will ultimately be upheld. “I just think that we’ll end up winning that court, in the Supreme Court. I think we’re going to win that case, and I look forward to winning it,” he said in the Oval Office in late January. “We’re the only country in the world that does this. There’s no other country at this level. There’s no other country in the world that does it. It’s crazy.” At least four lower-court judges have blocked Trump’s plan. Promise: Impose tariffs and improve the economy Trump thinks “tariff” is a beautiful word. He said so, repeatedly, during the campaign. “The word ‘tariff,’ properly used, is ... one of the most beautiful words I’ve ever heard. It’s music to my ears,” he said at a rally in Savannah, Georgia, on Sept. 24. It was part of his effort to convince voters that imposing tariffs would help bring back American manufacturing and create jobs. “And it will not cause inflation, by the way,” he often added, as he did at during the speech in Savannah. Trump announced his "reciprocal" tariffs at an event in the Rose Garden titled "Make America Wealthy Again" on April 2. Brendan Smialowski / AFP - Getty Images file Trump often oscillated on specifics of his tariff plan, at times promising he would impose a 100% tariff on all vehicles from Mexico and at other times proposing 10% to 20% tariffs across the board. At a speech in York, Pennsylvania, on Aug. 19, he claimed that imposing tariffs — “a small 10% tariff” — on foreign imports would “allow massive tax cuts for working families, create more than 3 million American jobs and raise household incomes by 6%.” Status: Mixed Trump’s tariffs have been a roller coaster . He imposed tariffs on Canada, Mexico and China. Then he imposed more tariffs on steel and aluminum. Then he paused the tariffs on Canada and Mexico. Then he unpaused them. Then he imposed what the administration called reciprocal tariffs. Then he rolled them back but increased the tariffs on China. In his address to Congress in early March, he acknowledged that there would be some pain before the economy adjusted to the tariffs: “Tariffs are about making America rich again and making America great again, and it’s happening, and it will happen rather quickly. There’ll be a little disturbance, but we’re OK with that. It won’t be much.” There has been more than a "little disturbance"; his first 100 days have been the worst for the stock market since Richard Nixon’s presidency, with a cliff dive around April 2, Trump’s “Liberation Day.” Promise: End inflation and lower prices Flanked by groceries on either side of the podium, Trump summoned the campaign media corps and a small group of supporters to his club in New Jersey in August to tell them: “When I win, I will immediately bring prices down, starting on Day One.” Just a few days later, in York, Pennsylvania, he told a large rally crowd that “this will help us quickly defeat inflation and make America affordable again.” It was a promise he made in most of his economy-focused speeches, especially toward the end of the campaign, when many voters said the economy and prices were their main concern. Status: Mixed During his 100 days in office, inflation has cooled from 3% to 2.4%. However, the tariffs and unruly markets have made economists jittery. Prices, especially at the grocery store, have continued to rise, especially because of the tariffs on imported foods. Consumer confidence hit a 12-year low in March . Trump nevertheless projected confidence at a Rose Garden event on April 2, the day he imposed “reciprocal” tariffs. “Groceries went through the roof, and I campaigned on that. I talked about the word ‘groceries’ for a lot. And energy costs now are down. Groceries are down. Gasoline is way under $3, and people are beginning to be able to buy things and live again. We brought prices way down,” he said. The numbers tell a different story. The rate of inflation has decreased from 3% in January to 2.4% in March, according to the Bureau of Labor Statistics . Prices, however, have either increased or stayed relatively the same. The average price of eggs increased from $4.95 in January to $6.22 in March. The average price of bacon dropped 70 cents from January to March. And the price of gas has stayed relatively flat, increasing just 20 cents a gallon from January to March. Promise: Make government more efficient At a speech to the Economic Club of New York in September, Trump announced that he would create a government efficiency commission — an idea first floated by billionaire tech executive Elon Musk — that would be “conducting a complete financial and performance audit of the entire federal government and making recommendations for drastic reforms.” “As the first order of business,” he said, “this commission will develop an action plan to totally eliminate fraud and improper payments within six months. This will save trillions of dollars, trillions.” Status: Failed The commission became a reality with DOGE (the Department of Government Efficiency), which was one of the splashiest and most attention-grabbing initiatives of Trump’s first 100 days. The savings, however, have been far from the $2 trillion initially promised . DOGE’s website estimated $160 billion in savings, just 8% of its original goal. But that estimate may be inflated, given that DOGE’s reporting has been riddled with errors and misleading claims. Those figures also don’t take into account the expenses associated with DOGE’s work, including legal fees, salaries and money spent on carrying out some of the massive changes — such as when the Agriculture Department accidentally fired and tried to rehire workers who were crafting the response to the H5N1 bird flu outbreak. The cuts also don’t factor in that Musk’s basket of policy proposals would actually add to the deficit , according to budget experts. Musk’s sledgehammer approach to restructuring the government through layoffs and eliminating entire agencies within departments has created significant confusion and uncertainty, with workers’ job statuses and missions often changing. Many of DOGE’s actions have been challenged and are awaiting rulings in courts. At a news conference in the Oval Office, in which Trump claimed billions had been found in savings through DOGE, Musk defended his department’s actions, saying: “The people voted for major government reform. There should be no doubt about that. That was on the campaign. The president spoke about that at every rally, the people voted for major government reform, and that’s what people are going to get. They’re going to get what they voted for.” Promise: Ban transgender athletes in women's sports Every time Trump declared that “I will keep men out of women’s sports” at his campaign rallies, it was his largest applause line. Status: Kept In early February, Trump signed an executive order banning transgender women and girls from competing in women's sports. It was the fourth executive order targeting transgender people he signed after he was inaugurated. The NCAA — a nonprofit organization that regulates student athletics among 1,100 colleges and universities across the United States — quickly complied with the order . “No matter how many surgeries you have or chemicals you inject, if you’re born with male DNA in every cell of your body, you can never become a woman. You’re not going to be a woman. And that’s why, last month, I proudly signed a historic executive order to ban men from competing in women’s sports and it was very popular — very, very popular,” Trump said at a Women’s History Month event in March. The order, however, faces legal challenges after the state of Maine refused to comply with it. When the administration pulled educational funding because of the state’s refusal, the governor sued the administration . The lawsuit is pending. Promise: Eliminate the Education Department “Returning education to the states” and giving more control to parents was a policy Trump often repeated on the campaign trail. “I want to close the Department of Education and move education back to the states with the law, and where parents have total control of their children’s lives,” Trump said at a Turning Point Action summit in West Palm Beach, Florida, in July 2023. Status: Failed Trump has slashed the Education Department — implementing mass layoffs, pulling funding and cutting programs — but it requires an act of Congress to eliminate the department fully. While Trump claimed that he signed an executive order “eliminating the Department of Education once and for all,” he later couched the statement, saying: “And I think it won’t be that long before the states will be really running the Department of Education. ... So I think you’re going to see a tremendous change very quickly having to do with education.” Promise: Cover IVF Trump told NBC News in August that he was going to provide government coverage for IVF treatments. “We are going to be, under the Trump administration, we are going to be paying for that treatment ,” he said, adding, “We’re going to be mandating that the insurance company pay.” He failed to provide any specifics about how the policy would be implemented or how it would be paid for. Status: Jury's still out Trump signed an executive order directing his policy team to provide policy recommendations on how to protect IVF and reduce out-of-pocket costs for the treatment within 90 days. But he has yet to announce any of the recommendations to implement a plan. The lack of specifics didn’t stop him from referring himself as “the fertilization president” at a Women’s History Event at the White House in March. Promise: Pardon Jan. 6 rioters The first indication that Trump would pardon convicted Jan. 6 rioters was in March 2023, when he played a version of “The Star-Spangled Banner” recorded by the “J6 choir” — a group of Jan. 6 defendants who were incarcerated and awaiting trial — at his rally in Waco, Texas. For a few months, he and his campaign hedged on the topic, saying they would consider each case individually. But then, roughly a year later, Trump confirmed his commitment to pardons, posting on Truth Social, “My first acts as your next President will be to Close the Border, DRILL, BABY, DRILL, and Free the January 6 Hostages being wrongfully imprisoned!” In July, at a panel hosted by the National Association of Black Journalists, he also said “I absolutely would” when he was asked whether he would pardon the Jan. 6 rioters. “If they’re innocent, I would pardon them,” he continued. One of the moderators, ABC News’ Rachel Scott, pushed back, saying, “They’ve been convicted.” Status: Kept On his first day in office, Trump issued roughly 1,500 pardons and commutations for his supporters in connection with the attack on the U.S. Capitol. Promise: End DEI in government In an early campaign video, Trump claimed that Biden was "weaponizing every tool of government power to push this racism and this communism and Marxism." "I will instruct the Department of Justice to make clear that any such discrimination is completely and totally illegal," he added, "and to investigate the unlawful domination and discrimination and civil right abuses carried out by the Biden administration.” Trump bashed diversity, equity and inclusion initiatives, promising to end related hiring practices and training in government. Status: Kept Trump has signed various executive orders eliminating DEI programs at different agencies. One order directed “ all departments and agencies to take strong action to end private sector DEI discrimination, including civil compliance investigations." The administration has targeted nearly 50 companies that it deemed to be in violation of its anti-DEI rules, according to a Bloomberg report . Most recently, on March 18, he directed the Education Department to end all its DEI initiatives. “I’ve ended all of the so-called diversity, equity and inclusion programs across the entire federal government and the private sector and notified every single government DEI officer that their job has been deleted. They’re gone. They’re fired,” he boasted at the Conservative Political Action Conference in February. Trump has also issued executive orders taking aim at private institutions — including universities and law firms — and pressuring them to end DEI practices. A number of companies have complied. Olympia Sonnier Olympia Sonnier is a field producer for NBC News. Megan Shannon Megan Shannon is a desk assistant with NBC News Washington. Garrett Haake and Ben Goggin contributed . About Contact Help Careers Ad Choices Privacy Policy Your Privacy Choices CA Notice Terms of Service (Updated JULY 7, 2023) NBC News Sitemap Closed Captioning Advertise Select Shopping © 2025 NBCUniversal Media, LLC NBC News Logo MSNBC Logo Today LogoWhat Trump has done in his first 100 Days on 14 major campaign promises IE 11 is not supported. For an optimal experience visit our site on another browser. Skip to Content NBC News Logo India-Pakistan Conclave Politics U.S. News Local New York Los Angeles Chicago Dallas-Fort Worth Philadelphia Washington, D.C. Boston Bay Area South Florida San Diego Connecticut World Sports Business Health Shopping Tipline Science Culture & Trends Share & Save — My News Manage Profile Email Preferences Sign Out Search Search Profile My News Sign Out Sign In Create your free profile Sections U.S. News Decision 2024 Politics World Business Sports Investigations Culture & Trends Health Science Tech Weather Video Features Photos NBC Select NBC Asian America NBC BLK NBC Latino NBC OUT Local New York Los Angeles Chicago Dallas-Fort Worth Philadelphia Washington, D.C. Boston Bay Area South Florida San Diego Connecticut tv Today Nightly News MSNBC Meet the Press Dateline Featured NBC News Now Nightly Films Stay Tuned Special Features Newsletters Podcasts Listen Now More From NBC CNBC NBC.COM NBCU Academy Peacock NEXT STEPS FOR VETS NBC News Site Map Help Follow NBC News news Alerts There are no new alerts at this time Search Search Facebook Twitter Email SMS Print Whatsapp Reddit Pocket Flipboard Pinterest Linkedin Latest Stories India-Pakistan Conclave Politics U.S. News World Sports Business Health Shopping Tipline Science Culture & Trends Donald Trump Here's what Trump has done on 14 of his major campaign promises NBC News tracked whether Trump has fulfilled his promises on everything from mass deportations, tariffs, ending DEI and banning transgender athletes from women's sports. Get more news Live on / Updated By Olympia Sonnier and Megan Shannon President Donald Trump has moved with remarkable speed in his first 100 days, issuing more than 100 executive orders and pushing an agenda that has the potential to rapidly remake America. The effort comes from some big promises he made on the campaign trail, among them to implement tariffs, carry out mass deportations and end major international conflicts. Here's a look at many of those promises and whether or not he has followed through: Promise: End war in Ukraine on or before Day 1 During his 721-day campaign, Trump consistently promised to end the war in Ukraine. At times, he even went as far as to add that he would end it in 24 hours. “Before I even arrive at the Oval Office, shortly after I win the presidency, I will have the disastrous war between Russia and Ukraine settled,” he told a rally crowd in Waco, Texas, in March 2023, adding, “I will have that settlement done within 24 hours.” In an interview on former Navy SEAL Shawn Ryan’s podcast in August, he said, “I will have that war settled when I’m president-elect, meaning before I get to office on Jan. 20.” Status: Failed One hundred days into Trump's second term, the conflict grinds on . In a recent interview with Time magazine, he claimed that his campaign rhetoric about the conflict was an “exaggeration and " was said in jest ." In one of the more memorable days of this administration, Trump and Vice President JD Vance berated Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelenskyy in the Oval Office, calling him ungrateful and saying he had “disrespected” the United States. Still, Trump acknowledged during the meeting that ending the war in Ukraine, which has been waged for over three years, would be “a very great achievement if we could get this war stopped and get them back to normalization.” Promise: End the war in Gaza Since Hamas terrorists attacked Israel on Oct. 7, 2023, Trump maintained that the attack would not have taken place had he been president at the time. Throughout the campaign, he kept in contact with Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu, even hosting him at his Mar-a-Lago estate in Florida in July. And on several occasions, especially when he was speaking to predominantly Jewish audiences, he promised he would “bring peace back to the Middle East.” “ We’re going to get it to work out ,” he told the Israeli-American Council in Washington in September. “I’m the candidate of those who want to defend Western civilization, defend Israel and defend the United States of America. When I return to the White House, we will quickly restore stability in the Middle East, and we will return the world to peace.” Status: Failed The beginning of 2025 showed promise; before Trump was sworn in, he dispatched his special envoy to the Middle East, Steve Witkoff, to work with President Joe Biden’s chief negotiator, Brett McGurk. A three-phase ceasefire deal was agreed to on Jan. 15, with Trump, then the president-elect, taking a victory lap. The deal lasted until March 18, when Israel launched a surprise attack on Gaza and Netanyahu announced that Israel had “ resumed combat in full force ” against Hamas. On April 7, during an event with Netanyahu, Trump indicated that the negotiators were close to a deal, saying: “Well, I’d like to see the war stop, and I think the war will stop at some point. That won’t be in the too distant future. Right now, we have a problem with hostages. We’re trying to get the hostages out. We got quite a few of them out, but it’s a long process. It shouldn’t be that long.” Thirty-three Israeli hostages and 1,800 Palestinians were returned during the ceasefire this year; 59 Israelis taken since the start of the Oct. 7 conflict remain in captivity. The Palestinian death toll since the start of the war stands at 52,243, according to the Gaza Health Ministry; the Israeli death toll is roughly 1,200 , according to the Israeli Foreign Affairs Ministry, and 251 people have been taken hostage. Promise: Close the border Immigration has long been one of Trump’s top issues in his campaigns. Throughout the 2024 race, he laid out various initiatives aimed at decreasing illegal immigration and the number of undocumented immigrants living in the United States. But largely, his agenda started with sealing the border — particularly the southern border with Mexico. Trump held more events focused on immigration than any other one topic, including the economy. At a rally in Aurora, Colorado, on Oct. 11, he said: “We will close the border. We will stop the invasion of illegals into our country. We will defend our territory. We will not be conquered. We will not be conquered. We will reclaim our sovereignty.” Status: Kept According to U.S. Customs and Border Protection, illegal crossings are at a historic low, having dropped from 211,896 in March 2022 to 8,193 in March 2025, a 96% decrease. Most recently, Trump took to Truth Social to highlight his accomplishment, writing , “THE SOUTHERN BORDER IS NOW THE STRONGEST AND SAFEST IN USA HISTORY. IT WILL REMAIN SO!!!” and noting “I beat my own record” at an event on April 22. Promise: Carry out the largest mass deportation operation in U.S. history Carrying out mass deportations was a cornerstone of Trump’s 2024 campaign, even though he never provided any specifics about how such an operation would be implemented or paid for. "I will send Congress a bill to ban all sanctuary cities in our country, including Denver, and we will begin the largest deportation operation in the history of the United States," he said at a rally in Aurora, Colorado, in October. On Oct. 27, just days before the election, Trump reiterated at a rally in New York City, “On Day One, I will launch the largest deportation program in American history to get the criminals out.” Status: Jury's still out While the administration did begin deportation operations almost immediately, Trump’s deportation numbers have been lower than those of both Biden and Barack Obama during the same period in their presidencies. But that is largely because the number of border encounters has been significantly lower. Trump has sent men alleged to be members of the Venezuelan criminal organization Tren de Aragua to a prison in El Salvador. El Salvador's Presidency Press Office / AFP - Getty Images file According to Trump’s border “czar,” Tom Homan, the administration had deported about 139,000 people as of Monday. Trump also faces multiple legal challenges to his deportation orders, many of which have been stayed by the Supreme Court or other federal courts. Homan told NBC News on Monday that he needs more funding from Congress to carry out Trump’s vision. “We need more, more money for beds. We need more money for more officers. We need more money for contractors that come in and do nonenforcement jobs and release the law enforcement officers to the street. We need more plane flights. So Congress needs to come through and fund us to keep President Trump’s promise to the American people,” he said. Promise: End birthright citizenship In 2023, Trump put out a video proposing to end birthright citizenship and ban what he called “birth tourism.” “On Day One of my new term in office,” he promised, “I will sign an executive order making clear to federal agencies that under the correct interpretation of the law, going forward, the future children of illegal aliens will not receive automatic U.S. citizenship.” Status: Jury's still out Trump signed an executive order ending birthright citizenship on his first day in office. But the order almost immediately faced legal challenges, three of which have made it to the Supreme Court. Arguments will be presented May 15. Trump has expressed confidence that the order will ultimately be upheld. “I just think that we’ll end up winning that court, in the Supreme Court. I think we’re going to win that case, and I look forward to winning it,” he said in the Oval Office in late January. “We’re the only country in the world that does this. There’s no other country at this level. There’s no other country in the world that does it. It’s crazy.” At least four lower-court judges have blocked Trump’s plan. Promise: Impose tariffs and improve the economy Trump thinks “tariff” is a beautiful word. He said so, repeatedly, during the campaign. “The word ‘tariff,’ properly used, is ... one of the most beautiful words I’ve ever heard. It’s music to my ears,” he said at a rally in Savannah, Georgia, on Sept. 24. It was part of his effort to convince voters that imposing tariffs would help bring back American manufacturing and create jobs. “And it will not cause inflation, by the way,” he often added, as he did at during the speech in Savannah. Trump announced his "reciprocal" tariffs at an event in the Rose Garden titled "Make America Wealthy Again" on April 2. Brendan Smialowski / AFP - Getty Images file Trump often oscillated on specifics of his tariff plan, at times promising he would impose a 100% tariff on all vehicles from Mexico and at other times proposing 10% to 20% tariffs across the board. At a speech in York, Pennsylvania, on Aug. 19, he claimed that imposing tariffs — “a small 10% tariff” — on foreign imports would “allow massive tax cuts for working families, create more than 3 million American jobs and raise household incomes by 6%.” Status: Mixed Trump’s tariffs have been a roller coaster . He imposed tariffs on Canada, Mexico and China. Then he imposed more tariffs on steel and aluminum. Then he paused the tariffs on Canada and Mexico. Then he unpaused them. Then he imposed what the administration called reciprocal tariffs. Then he rolled them back but increased the tariffs on China. In his address to Congress in early March, he acknowledged that there would be some pain before the economy adjusted to the tariffs: “Tariffs are about making America rich again and making America great again, and it’s happening, and it will happen rather quickly. There’ll be a little disturbance, but we’re OK with that. It won’t be much.” There has been more than a "little disturbance"; his first 100 days have been the worst for the stock market since Richard Nixon’s presidency, with a cliff dive around April 2, Trump’s “Liberation Day.” Promise: End inflation and lower prices Flanked by groceries on either side of the podium, Trump summoned the campaign media corps and a small group of supporters to his club in New Jersey in August to tell them: “When I win, I will immediately bring prices down, starting on Day One.” Just a few days later, in York, Pennsylvania, he told a large rally crowd that “this will help us quickly defeat inflation and make America affordable again.” It was a promise he made in most of his economy-focused speeches, especially toward the end of the campaign, when many voters said the economy and prices were their main concern. Status: Mixed During his 100 days in office, inflation has cooled from 3% to 2.4%. However, the tariffs and unruly markets have made economists jittery. Prices, especially at the grocery store, have continued to rise, especially because of the tariffs on imported foods. Consumer confidence hit a 12-year low in March . Trump nevertheless projected confidence at a Rose Garden event on April 2, the day he imposed “reciprocal” tariffs. “Groceries went through the roof, and I campaigned on that. I talked about the word ‘groceries’ for a lot. And energy costs now are down. Groceries are down. Gasoline is way under $3, and people are beginning to be able to buy things and live again. We brought prices way down,” he said. The numbers tell a different story. The rate of inflation has decreased from 3% in January to 2.4% in March, according to the Bureau of Labor Statistics . Prices, however, have either increased or stayed relatively the same. The average price of eggs increased from $4.95 in January to $6.22 in March. The average price of bacon dropped 70 cents from January to March. And the price of gas has stayed relatively flat, increasing just 20 cents a gallon from January to March. Promise: Make government more efficient At a speech to the Economic Club of New York in September, Trump announced that he would create a government efficiency commission — an idea first floated by billionaire tech executive Elon Musk — that would be “conducting a complete financial and performance audit of the entire federal government and making recommendations for drastic reforms.” “As the first order of business,” he said, “this commission will develop an action plan to totally eliminate fraud and improper payments within six months. This will save trillions of dollars, trillions.” Status: Failed The commission became a reality with DOGE (the Department of Government Efficiency), which was one of the splashiest and most attention-grabbing initiatives of Trump’s first 100 days. The savings, however, have been far from the $2 trillion initially promised . DOGE’s website estimated $160 billion in savings, just 8% of its original goal. But that estimate may be inflated, given that DOGE’s reporting has been riddled with errors and misleading claims. Those figures also don’t take into account the expenses associated with DOGE’s work, including legal fees, salaries and money spent on carrying out some of the massive changes — such as when the Agriculture Department accidentally fired and tried to rehire workers who were crafting the response to the H5N1 bird flu outbreak. The cuts also don’t factor in that Musk’s basket of policy proposals would actually add to the deficit , according to budget experts. Musk’s sledgehammer approach to restructuring the government through layoffs and eliminating entire agencies within departments has created significant confusion and uncertainty, with workers’ job statuses and missions often changing. Many of DOGE’s actions have been challenged and are awaiting rulings in courts. At a news conference in the Oval Office, in which Trump claimed billions had been found in savings through DOGE, Musk defended his department’s actions, saying: “The people voted for major government reform. There should be no doubt about that. That was on the campaign. The president spoke about that at every rally, the people voted for major government reform, and that’s what people are going to get. They’re going to get what they voted for.” Promise: Ban transgender athletes in women's sports Every time Trump declared that “I will keep men out of women’s sports” at his campaign rallies, it was his largest applause line. Status: Kept In early February, Trump signed an executive order banning transgender women and girls from competing in women's sports. It was the fourth executive order targeting transgender people he signed after he was inaugurated. The NCAA — a nonprofit organization that regulates student athletics among 1,100 colleges and universities across the United States — quickly complied with the order . “No matter how many surgeries you have or chemicals you inject, if you’re born with male DNA in every cell of your body, you can never become a woman. You’re not going to be a woman. And that’s why, last month, I proudly signed a historic executive order to ban men from competing in women’s sports and it was very popular — very, very popular,” Trump said at a Women’s History Month event in March. The order, however, faces legal challenges after the state of Maine refused to comply with it. When the administration pulled educational funding because of the state’s refusal, the governor sued the administration . The lawsuit is pending. Promise: Eliminate the Education Department “Returning education to the states” and giving more control to parents was a policy Trump often repeated on the campaign trail. “I want to close the Department of Education and move education back to the states with the law, and where parents have total control of their children’s lives,” Trump said at a Turning Point Action summit in West Palm Beach, Florida, in July 2023. Status: Failed Trump has slashed the Education Department — implementing mass layoffs, pulling funding and cutting programs — but it requires an act of Congress to eliminate the department fully. While Trump claimed that he signed an executive order “eliminating the Department of Education once and for all,” he later couched the statement, saying: “And I think it won’t be that long before the states will be really running the Department of Education. ... So I think you’re going to see a tremendous change very quickly having to do with education.” Promise: Cover IVF Trump told NBC News in August that he was going to provide government coverage for IVF treatments. “We are going to be, under the Trump administration, we are going to be paying for that treatment ,” he said, adding, “We’re going to be mandating that the insurance company pay.” He failed to provide any specifics about how the policy would be implemented or how it would be paid for. Status: Jury's still out Trump signed an executive order directing his policy team to provide policy recommendations on how to protect IVF and reduce out-of-pocket costs for the treatment within 90 days. But he has yet to announce any of the recommendations to implement a plan. The lack of specifics didn’t stop him from referring himself as “the fertilization president” at a Women’s History Event at the White House in March. Promise: Pardon Jan. 6 rioters The first indication that Trump would pardon convicted Jan. 6 rioters was in March 2023, when he played a version of “The Star-Spangled Banner” recorded by the “J6 choir” — a group of Jan. 6 defendants who were incarcerated and awaiting trial — at his rally in Waco, Texas. For a few months, he and his campaign hedged on the topic, saying they would consider each case individually. But then, roughly a year later, Trump confirmed his commitment to pardons, posting on Truth Social, “My first acts as your next President will be to Close the Border, DRILL, BABY, DRILL, and Free the January 6 Hostages being wrongfully imprisoned!” In July, at a panel hosted by the National Association of Black Journalists, he also said “I absolutely would” when he was asked whether he would pardon the Jan. 6 rioters. “If they’re innocent, I would pardon them,” he continued. One of the moderators, ABC News’ Rachel Scott, pushed back, saying, “They’ve been convicted.” Status: Kept On his first day in office, Trump issued roughly 1,500 pardons and commutations for his supporters in connection with the attack on the U.S. Capitol. Promise: End DEI in government In an early campaign video, Trump claimed that Biden was "weaponizing every tool of government power to push this racism and this communism and Marxism." "I will instruct the Department of Justice to make clear that any such discrimination is completely and totally illegal," he added, "and to investigate the unlawful domination and discrimination and civil right abuses carried out by the Biden administration.” Trump bashed diversity, equity and inclusion initiatives, promising to end related hiring practices and training in government. Status: Kept Trump has signed various executive orders eliminating DEI programs at different agencies. One order directed “ all departments and agencies to take strong action to end private sector DEI discrimination, including civil compliance investigations." The administration has targeted nearly 50 companies that it deemed to be in violation of its anti-DEI rules, according to a Bloomberg report . Most recently, on March 18, he directed the Education Department to end all its DEI initiatives. “I’ve ended all of the so-called diversity, equity and inclusion programs across the entire federal government and the private sector and notified every single government DEI officer that their job has been deleted. They’re gone. They’re fired,” he boasted at the Conservative Political Action Conference in February. Trump has also issued executive orders taking aim at private institutions — including universities and law firms — and pressuring them to end DEI practices. A number of companies have complied. Olympia Sonnier Olympia Sonnier is a field producer for NBC News. Megan Shannon Megan Shannon is a desk assistant with NBC News Washington. Garrett Haake and Ben Goggin contributed . About Contact Help Careers Ad Choices Privacy Policy Your Privacy Choices CA Notice Terms of Service (Updated JULY 7, 2023) NBC News Sitemap Closed Captioning Advertise Select Shopping © 2025 NBCUniversal Media, LLC NBC News Logo MSNBC Logo Today LogoObaseki launches Edo refinery, others, laments lack of crude × Advertise with us Wednesday, May 07, 2025 Most Widely Read Newspaper Videos Home News Featured Politics Metro Plus Business Sports HealthWise PUNCH Lite Editorial Columns Videos Continuation From Print PunchNG Menu: Video Spice Special Features Education Sex & Relationship Interview Columns Opinion Advertise with us Obaseki launches Edo refinery, others, laments lack of crude 13th November 2023 Edo State Governor, Godwin Obaseki By Temitayo Jaiyeola Kindly share this story: Getting your Trinity Audio player ready... The Edo Refinery is seeking to expand its production capacity by 6,000 barrels per day, the state’s governor, Mr Godwin Obaseki, has disclosed. He revealed this during the commissioning of Edo Refinery and Petrochemical Company Limited and other projects. He stated that investors began investing in the state’s refinery in 2017 which is now ready. In a statement, he said, “I am glad and can’t express how excited I am to formally cut the tape and walk through this facility. This is one of the first investments we encouraged investors to make way back in 2017. “To show our commitment, the State Government and EDSOGPADEC co-invested in this project. Like most projects, it has its own challenges but due to the doggedness of the promoters, they were able to overcome the challenges. This project is not only completed but we are looking at expanding by another 6,000 barrels per day.” Obaseki further lamented how the refinery is yet to get crude oil even though it is ready for use. He declared, “We are glad that the management of this company and project has remained steadfast and use this opportunity to appeal to the Federal Government to align with what the State is doing as we have done our own bid from this project. “We have raised the money, given them the land, communities supported, now the project is ready but no road to bring feedstock. We can’t get crude oil, which is required as feedstock into the project, meanwhile, we are a crude oil exporting country. “We are appealing to the Federal Government to support businesses and come to their aid to move this country forward. We will continue to support those businesses that have the raw materials to produce.” According to reports, the Edo backed Edo Modular Refinery, which has a capacity of 6,000bpd, can produce 50 per cent of diesel (500,000 litres), 25 percent of naphtha (300,000 litres) and 20 per cent of Low Pour Fuel Oil (LPFO) (200,000) litres. While commissioning a 3.65km Road in Ologbo, Ikpoba Okha Local Government Area of the State, the Edo State governor stated that the road was constructed by Saro Africa under the state’s tax credit scheme. He highlighted that the scheme was targeted at revolutionising the government’s approach to financing infrastructure to support development. At the commissioning, he said, “First, it’s the first infrastructure tax credit project that we are undertaking in Edo State and by any sub-national. It’s only the national government that can be able to give tax credits for the purpose of infrastructure.” Related News How I fight as custodian of war deity– King Dakolo NNPCL under fire as $897m Warri refinery revamp flops NNPCL sells N336bn crude to Dangote, foreign refiners – Report Obaseki who also commissioned the Green Hill Ethanol Factory noted that the project will boost local production and job availability. Meanwhile, Obaseki, the chairman of the Board of Trustees, Alaghodaro Economic Summit Ltd/Gte, Dr Asue Ighodalo, and the Chairman and Chief Executive Officer of the Dangote Group, Alhaji Aliko Dangote, and other guests at the 2023 Alaghodaro Investment Summit have predicted that Edo State has the potential to become a more developed economy on account of its growth trajectory in the past seven years. They alleged that the state has witnessed an economic boom of over 140 percent from $10.6bn to $25.8bn. Ighodalo, who is also the Chairman of Sterling Bank Plc, in his address at the summit, stated that the summit has attracted about $4bn in the past seven years. He said, “Over the past seven years, Edo State has grown 140 per cent from an economy of $10.6bn to $25.8bn today, while Nigeria’s economy grew at 4 per cent. “Edo State can become a first world economy regardless of the challenges of Nigeria. The new investments attracted from new investors are put at $4bn sourced from Nigeria and from joint partnerships as the State has the capacity and will.” Also speaking at the event, the Chairman and Chief Executive Officer of the Dangote Group, Aliko Dangote, noted that Edo State has a comparative advantage over a lot of other states in agriculture and agro-processing as well as culture and tourism. Aliko, who was the keynote speaker at the 2023 Alaghodaro Investment Summit, was represented by the Dangote Group’s Managing Director, Mr Olakunle Alake, at the summit. He stated, “Edo State has a comparative advantage over every other State in the area of agriculture and agro-processing as well as tourism sectors. “Investments are coming into Edo State because of the friendly environment created by the governor for investors and today, Edo has become an investment destination. The State boasts of tourist sites across various locations in the State and the State Government has taken advantage of it to turn the State into a tourism hub.” Dangote added that the ease of doing business in the state was a point of attraction for investors to invest. Also speaking at the event, the governor, Obaseki, disclosed that the state has introduced a computerised system for its civil service. He added that the state has continuously increased its monthly IGR since 2016. Temitayo Jaiyeola The PUNCH journalist, Temitayo, has over two years experience covering the tech ecosystem, telecommunications, and the economy Kindly share this story: All rights reserved. This material, and other digital content on this website, may not be reproduced, published, broadcast, rewritten or redistributed in whole or in part without prior express written permission from PUNCH. Contact: [email protected] Stay informed and ahead of the curve! Follow The Punch Newspaper on WhatsApp for real-time updates, breaking news, and exclusive content. Don't miss a headline – join now! Join The Punch Newspapers Channel Download e-Copy Latest News 6 minutes ago Police arrest international fugitives wanted for human trafficking, robbery 9 minutes ago Cardinals hold last mass before conclave to elect pope 11 minutes ago FG begins overhaul of NYSC scheme, plans teachers’, medical corps 15 minutes ago NSCDC deploys 1,531 officers for Tinubu's Anambra visit 15 minutes ago Nigeria First Policy: Replace your Escalade with Innoson, Atiku tells Tinubu Top News Police arrest international fugitives wanted for human trafficking, robbery February 19, 2022 [ICYMI] Step-by-step guide on checking 2025 UTME results Lawyer laments hurdles securing VeryDarkMan’s bail FG kicks as Pat Utomi forms shadow govt Senate to pass Tinubu’s tax bills today Japa: UK considers tighter visa rules for Nigerians, Pakistanis Defections: Okowa denies N500bn refund as Oborevwori visits Tinubu Senate sets up committee to oversee Rivers administrator El-Rufai placeholder for Atiku in SDP – Galadima Major petrol, diesel price cuts expected over crude slump News Sports Metro Plus Politics Featured Latest News Business Business & Economy Opinion Entertainment Auto Famous Barka Da Sallah Barrier Breakers Breaking News Brexit Columns Corona Anti-corruption Biafra Boko Haram Case Review Court News Court Trivia Campus Champion Celebrity City round Interview Panorama Opinion Special Features Spice Technology Famous Parent Education Cartoon Columns Diaspora Advertise Subscribe Affiliate Disclaimer Subscribe punchng.com © 1971- 2025 Punch Nigeria Limited About us Advertise with us ContactObaseki launches Edo refinery, others, laments lack of crude × Advertise with us Wednesday, May 07, 2025 Most Widely Read Newspaper Videos Home News Featured Politics Metro Plus Business Sports HealthWise PUNCH Lite Editorial Columns Videos Continuation From Print PunchNG Menu: Video Spice Special Features Education Sex & Relationship Interview Columns Opinion Advertise with us Obaseki launches Edo refinery, others, laments lack of crude 13th November 2023 Edo State Governor, Godwin Obaseki By Temitayo Jaiyeola Kindly share this story: Getting your Trinity Audio player ready... The Edo Refinery is seeking to expand its production capacity by 6,000 barrels per day, the state’s governor, Mr Godwin Obaseki, has disclosed. He revealed this during the commissioning of Edo Refinery and Petrochemical Company Limited and other projects. He stated that investors began investing in the state’s refinery in 2017 which is now ready. In a statement, he said, “I am glad and can’t express how excited I am to formally cut the tape and walk through this facility. This is one of the first investments we encouraged investors to make way back in 2017. “To show our commitment, the State Government and EDSOGPADEC co-invested in this project. Like most projects, it has its own challenges but due to the doggedness of the promoters, they were able to overcome the challenges. This project is not only completed but we are looking at expanding by another 6,000 barrels per day.” Obaseki further lamented how the refinery is yet to get crude oil even though it is ready for use. He declared, “We are glad that the management of this company and project has remained steadfast and use this opportunity to appeal to the Federal Government to align with what the State is doing as we have done our own bid from this project. “We have raised the money, given them the land, communities supported, now the project is ready but no road to bring feedstock. We can’t get crude oil, which is required as feedstock into the project, meanwhile, we are a crude oil exporting country. “We are appealing to the Federal Government to support businesses and come to their aid to move this country forward. We will continue to support those businesses that have the raw materials to produce.” According to reports, the Edo backed Edo Modular Refinery, which has a capacity of 6,000bpd, can produce 50 per cent of diesel (500,000 litres), 25 percent of naphtha (300,000 litres) and 20 per cent of Low Pour Fuel Oil (LPFO) (200,000) litres. While commissioning a 3.65km Road in Ologbo, Ikpoba Okha Local Government Area of the State, the Edo State governor stated that the road was constructed by Saro Africa under the state’s tax credit scheme. He highlighted that the scheme was targeted at revolutionising the government’s approach to financing infrastructure to support development. At the commissioning, he said, “First, it’s the first infrastructure tax credit project that we are undertaking in Edo State and by any sub-national. It’s only the national government that can be able to give tax credits for the purpose of infrastructure.” Related News How I fight as custodian of war deity– King Dakolo NNPCL under fire as $897m Warri refinery revamp flops NNPCL sells N336bn crude to Dangote, foreign refiners – Report Obaseki who also commissioned the Green Hill Ethanol Factory noted that the project will boost local production and job availability. Meanwhile, Obaseki, the chairman of the Board of Trustees, Alaghodaro Economic Summit Ltd/Gte, Dr Asue Ighodalo, and the Chairman and Chief Executive Officer of the Dangote Group, Alhaji Aliko Dangote, and other guests at the 2023 Alaghodaro Investment Summit have predicted that Edo State has the potential to become a more developed economy on account of its growth trajectory in the past seven years. They alleged that the state has witnessed an economic boom of over 140 percent from $10.6bn to $25.8bn. Ighodalo, who is also the Chairman of Sterling Bank Plc, in his address at the summit, stated that the summit has attracted about $4bn in the past seven years. He said, “Over the past seven years, Edo State has grown 140 per cent from an economy of $10.6bn to $25.8bn today, while Nigeria’s economy grew at 4 per cent. “Edo State can become a first world economy regardless of the challenges of Nigeria. The new investments attracted from new investors are put at $4bn sourced from Nigeria and from joint partnerships as the State has the capacity and will.” Also speaking at the event, the Chairman and Chief Executive Officer of the Dangote Group, Aliko Dangote, noted that Edo State has a comparative advantage over a lot of other states in agriculture and agro-processing as well as culture and tourism. Aliko, who was the keynote speaker at the 2023 Alaghodaro Investment Summit, was represented by the Dangote Group’s Managing Director, Mr Olakunle Alake, at the summit. He stated, “Edo State has a comparative advantage over every other State in the area of agriculture and agro-processing as well as tourism sectors. “Investments are coming into Edo State because of the friendly environment created by the governor for investors and today, Edo has become an investment destination. The State boasts of tourist sites across various locations in the State and the State Government has taken advantage of it to turn the State into a tourism hub.” Dangote added that the ease of doing business in the state was a point of attraction for investors to invest. Also speaking at the event, the governor, Obaseki, disclosed that the state has introduced a computerised system for its civil service. He added that the state has continuously increased its monthly IGR since 2016. Temitayo Jaiyeola The PUNCH journalist, Temitayo, has over two years experience covering the tech ecosystem, telecommunications, and the economy Kindly share this story: All rights reserved. This material, and other digital content on this website, may not be reproduced, published, broadcast, rewritten or redistributed in whole or in part without prior express written permission from PUNCH. Contact: [email protected] Stay informed and ahead of the curve! Follow The Punch Newspaper on WhatsApp for real-time updates, breaking news, and exclusive content. Don't miss a headline – join now! Join The Punch Newspapers Channel Download e-Copy Latest News 6 minutes ago Police arrest international fugitives wanted for human trafficking, robbery 10 minutes ago Cardinals hold last mass before conclave to elect pope 12 minutes ago FG begins overhaul of NYSC scheme, plans teachers’, medical corps 15 minutes ago NSCDC deploys 1,531 officers for Tinubu's Anambra visit 15 minutes ago Nigeria First Policy: Replace your Escalade with Innoson, Atiku tells Tinubu Top News Police arrest international fugitives wanted for human trafficking, robbery February 19, 2022 [ICYMI] Step-by-step guide on checking 2025 UTME results Lawyer laments hurdles securing VeryDarkMan’s bail FG kicks as Pat Utomi forms shadow govt Senate to pass Tinubu’s tax bills today Japa: UK considers tighter visa rules for Nigerians, Pakistanis Defections: Okowa denies N500bn refund as Oborevwori visits Tinubu Senate sets up committee to oversee Rivers administrator El-Rufai placeholder for Atiku in SDP – Galadima Major petrol, diesel price cuts expected over crude slump News Sports Metro Plus Politics Featured Latest News Business Business & Economy Opinion Entertainment Auto Famous Barka Da Sallah Barrier Breakers Breaking News Brexit Columns Corona Anti-corruption Biafra Boko Haram Case Review Court News Court Trivia Campus Champion Celebrity City round Interview Panorama Opinion Special Features Spice Technology Famous Parent Education Cartoon Columns Diaspora Advertise Subscribe Affiliate Disclaimer Subscribe punchng.com © 1971- 2025 Punch Nigeria Limited About us Advertise with us ContactFactchecking Kenya’s chief justice on judiciary funding and backlog of cases - Africa Check Skip to main content English Français Main navigation Fact-checks Reports Factsheets Guides Spot Checks Blog Meta programme fact-checks Republish our work Who we are Our team Our impact How we are funded Partners Get in touch What we do Info Finder African Fact-Checking Awards Corrections Fact-checking research Training Media Literacy Educator knowledge hub How we fact-check Corrections policy Code of principles How we rate claims Get Involved Donate Submit a claim to fact-check Partner with us Join our team Fact-checking tips Quizzes Donate Back to Africa Check Factchecking Kenya’s chief justice on judiciary funding and backlog of cases Published on 17 September 2020 Claim Six claims about the Kenyan judiciary, from its budget and number of cases to how many judges and magistrates serve Kenya’s population. Verdict Four correct, one understated and one unproven Source Kenya’s chief justice, David Maraga (August 2020) This article is more than 4 years old Maraga was largely correct about the judiciary budget and how many Kenyans are served per judge and magistrate in the country. The chief justice was also correct that the number of cases filed in Kenyan courts every year exceeds the number of cases the judiciary settles by as much as 100,000, causing an ever-growing backlog. But there isn’t evidence of a global average for comparing the number of judges and magistrates per population – there are too many variables in different legal systems. To mark the tenth anniversary of Kenya’s constitution , broadcaster NTV interviewed current and former government officials on how the law has been applied. Chief justice David Maraga told NTV that while the 2010 constitution had sought to strengthen the judiciary’s independence, funding was a perennial headache. “[Budget cuts] hit the judiciary sometimes to a point that its operations grind to a halt,” Maraga said in the interview , published in August 2020. In recent months the chief justice has been vocal on how cuts have hampered the delivery of judicial services. In his interview, Maraga made several claims. We looked into their accuracy. Claim The judiciary does not even get 1% of the national budget Verdict correct Maraga, who assumed office in 2016, asked for more funding as “the judiciary does not even get 1% of the national budget”. “We have said, over and over again, that for the judiciary to operate properly we should get at least 2.5% of the national budget,” he said . Africa Check has previously found there isn’t a “recommended global percentage” of funding for the judiciary from the national budget. In 2018 Maraga also claimed it was 2.5%. To determine how much has been allocated to the judiciary in recent years we consulted the appropriation acts, the laws that show budget allocations to government departments. For the national budget, we checked budget statements. Judiciary amounts as share of Kenya budget Year Judiciary budget (KSh billion) National budget (KSh trillion) Share 2014/15 17.5 1.58 1.1% 2015/16 16.7 2 0.8% 2016/17 17.3 2.3 0.8% 2017/18 17.6 2.3 0.8% 2018/19 14.5 2.6 0.6% 2019/20 18.9 2.8 0.7% 2020/21 17.4 2.8 0.6% Sources: Budget speeches for 2020 , 2019 , 2018 , 2017 , 2016 , 2015 and 2014 and Appropriations Acts for 2020, 2019 , 2018 , 2017 , 2016 , 2015 and 2014 . Note: The figures shown have been rounded up. Only once in the last seven financial years, in 2014/15, did the judiciary receive more than 1% of the national budget. We therefore rate this claim as correct. Claim We have an average of 400,000 cases being filed in our courts every year Verdict correct The most recent state of the judiciary report covers the 2018/19 financial year. Released in January 2020, it shows that more than two million cases were lodged in all courts between 2014/15 and 2018/19. The report said : “The number of filed cases provides quantitative information on the extent of demand for court services by the public.” Total number of cases filed in the judiciary Financial year Cases 2014/15 334,685 2015/16 460,961 2016/17 344,180 2017/18 402,243 2018/19 484,349 Average 405,283 The average number of cases filed in the period covered by the report works out to 405,283 a year. We therefore rate this claim as correct. Claim We only dispose of about 300,000 cases Verdict correct Discussing the country’s case backlog, Maraga said the judiciary settles about 300,000 cases every year. This number was determined by the number of judges and magistrates and would only continue to pile up. “Unless the judiciary is given enough resources to have enough manpower, Kenyans will continue crying about delayed cases,” he said . The most recent state of the judiciary report has data covering 2014/15 to 2018/19. It shows an average of 321,652 cases settled across the five financial years. As of 2018/19 there were 153 judges and 546 magistrates in Kenya. Number of cases resolved by the judiciary Financial year Cases 2014/15 272,605 2015/16 191,625 2016/17 304,182 2017/18 370,488 2018/19 469,359 Average 321,652 We therefore rate the claim as correct. Claim In Kenya now with a population of about 48 million, we have one judge serving over 300,000 people Verdict correct There are 47.6 million people in Kenya, according to 2019 census data. The most recent data from the judiciary shows there were 153 judges as of June 2019. This works out to one judge for every 311,000 people. We rate this claim as correct. Claim We have one magistrate serving over 77,000 people Verdict understated The most recent data from the judiciary shows there were 546 magistrates in Kenya as of June 2019. The state of the judiciary report was released in January 2020. Using a population of 47.6 million , this works out to one magistrate for every 87,114 people. The chief justice’s figure was off by over 10,000 but it was still “over 77,000” people per magistrate. We therefore rate it as understated. Claim There is a ‘global average’ for the number of judges and magistrates to number of people Verdict unproven A calculation for a “global average” can be achieved by directly comparing the number of judges and magistrates to the world population. But to account for population differences, rates (per 100,000 people) are widely used . ( Note: See box below for more context. ) The chief justice has in the past spoken of a “recommended global percentage” of funding for the judiciary. We have contacted the judiciary for the source of the "global average" cited by the chief justice and will update this report with their response. Wachira Maina is a constitutional lawyer in Kenya who has written about the progress of institutions, including the judiciary, following the adoption of the 2010 constitution. He directed us to the UN Office of Drug and Crime (UNODC) for data on the administration of justice professionals against a country’s population. It shows there were 1.3 judges or magistrates for every 100,000 people in Kenya in 2014, 3.6 for South Africa in 2015, and 0.8 for the US and 8.7 for China in 2017. But the UNODC noted key weaknesses in the data when comparing countries. “The numbers reported are not restricted to judges deciding criminal cases,” it said. “The comparability problem might get even worse because some countries might still only report the number of judges whose duty is the judgment of criminal cases. “Apart from this, it is not clear whether really all judges are included in the reported figures in all countries.” Without a source for the chief justice’s claim of a global average, we can only rate this final claim as unproven. Is calculating the ratio of judges and magistrates to the population useful? The ratio of judges and magistrates to the population is useful depending on what you’re using it to show, Wachira Maina , a constitutional lawyer in Kenya told Africa Check. He gave an example of using the ratio of the number of doctors to the population as a metric for access to health, and of police officers to measure access to security services. However, he said, ratio data leaves a lot unstated, such as the distribution by region and by urban and rural areas. Therefore “to determine access to services, you will almost certainly need additional information”. “A high ratio by itself does not prove that most people have access to services, merely that if services were equitably distributed, and they rarely are, more people would have access,” Maina said. “Keep in mind though that you cannot increase access unless you have the numbers, so the ratio does still say something useful.” Chris Kerkering is a litigation manager at Katiba Institute , an organisation in Nairobi that promotes the knowledge of Kenya’s constitution. He told Africa Check that population does not automatically equate to a judge’s caseload. A very litigious society would have more cases per population, he said. Caseload and caseload weighting, which Kerkering described as not only counting the number of cases but also being able to determine how much time each respective case would take , may be the best way to determine whether a judiciary has the appropriate number of judges. But since doing a comparison between different countries with different legal systems and different cultures would be near impossible, “judges per population is a decent aggregate”, Kerkering said. He said the chief justice’s focus was on access to justice. “If there are not enough judges and the staff that support them then they are unable to provide the services that the judiciary requires. Case backlogs become one of the more obvious problems. Fewer judges mean that each judge is taking more cases.” “The more cases a judge has, the more time it takes to get through them. Access to justice requires timely decisions. The phrase ‘justice delayed is justice denied,’ is so commonly used for a reason. Often, as a case winds its way through the court system, avoidable delays result in long term harm.” “A judiciary that can’t get through its caseload promptly can’t ensure access to justice as required by the constitution.” Carlos Mureithi is a journalist based in Nairobi, Kenya Further reading: https://africacheck.org/reports/budget-cuts-hit-kenyas-judiciary-but-theres-no-global-funding-target/ Republish our content for free We believe that everyone needs the facts. You can republish the text of this article free of charge, both online and in print. However, we ask that you pay attention to these simple guidelines . In a nutshell: 1. Do not include images, as in most cases we do not own the copyright. 2. Please do not edit the article. 3. Make sure you credit "Africa Check" in the byline and don't forget to mention that the article was originally published on africacheck.org . Name Surname Email Leave this field blank Carlos Mureithi Claim Six claims about the Kenyan judiciary, from its budget and number of cases to how many judges and magistrates serve Kenya’s population. Verdict Four correct, one understated and one unproven Source Kenya’s chief justice, David Maraga (August 2020) Join us on WhatsApp Further Reading false Nigeria Trump USAid funding No, Trump cut USAid funding to Nigeria – and elsewhere – because of US interests, not because of corrupt Nigerian politicians false South Africa HIV HIV/AIDS United States funding government false claim No, 100% of South Africa’s HIV/Aids funding does not come from the United States – mostly funded by the South African government Nigeria budget debt policing Osita Chidoka aviation minister Fact-checking former minister Osita Chidoka's claims on Nigeria's 2025 budget, debt and policing Add new comment Your name Comment About text formats Restricted HTML Allowed HTML tags: <a href hreflang> <em> <strong> <cite> <blockquote cite> <code> <ul type> <ol start type> <li> <dl> <dt> <dd> <h2 id> <h3 id> <h4 id> <h5 id> <h6 id> Lines and paragraphs break automatically. Web page addresses and email addresses turn into links automatically. limit: 600 characters Leave this field blank Sign up to our newsletter Name Africa Check values your trust and is committed to the responsible management, use and protection of personal information. See our privacy policy. Leave this field blank Spot Checks View All false Nigeria Trump USAid funding No, Trump cut USAid funding to Nigeria – and elsewhere – because of US interests, not because of corrupt Nigerian politicians false South Africa HIV HIV/AIDS United States funding government false claim No, 100% of South Africa’s HIV/Aids funding does not come from the United States – mostly funded by the South African government Nigeria budget debt policing Osita Chidoka aviation minister Fact-checking former minister Osita Chidoka's claims on Nigeria's 2025 budget, debt and policing We hold public figures accountable For democracy to function, public figures need to be held to account for what they say. The claims they make need to be checked, openly and impartially. Africa Check is an independent, non-partisan organisation which assesses claims made in the public arena using journalistic skills and evidence drawn from the latest online tools, readers, public sources and experts, sorting fact from fiction and publishing the results. Browse by category Health Covid-19 Education Crime Economy Kenya Nigeria Senegal South Africa Sign up to our newsletter Name Africa Check values your trust and is committed to the responsible management, use and protection of personal information. See our privacy policy. Leave this field blank Follow us Facebook Twitter Instagram TikTok Footer About Partner With Us Terms and Conditions Contact Us Sitemap Want to keep reading our fact-checks? We will never charge you for verified, reliable information. Help us keep it that way by supporting our work. Become a newsletter subscriber Name Africa Check values your trust and is committed to the responsible management, use and protection of personal information. See our privacy policy. Leave this field blank Support independent fact-checking in Africa. See our donation optionsFactchecking Kenya’s chief justice on judiciary funding and backlog of cases - Africa Check Skip to main content English Français Main navigation Fact-checks Reports Factsheets Guides Spot Checks Blog Meta programme fact-checks Republish our work Who we are Our team Our impact How we are funded Partners Get in touch What we do Info Finder African Fact-Checking Awards Corrections Fact-checking research Training Media Literacy Educator knowledge hub How we fact-check Corrections policy Code of principles How we rate claims Get Involved Donate Submit a claim to fact-check Partner with us Join our team Fact-checking tips Quizzes Donate Back to Africa Check Factchecking Kenya’s chief justice on judiciary funding and backlog of cases Published on 17 September 2020 Claim Six claims about the Kenyan judiciary, from its budget and number of cases to how many judges and magistrates serve Kenya’s population. Verdict Four correct, one understated and one unproven Source Kenya’s chief justice, David Maraga (August 2020) This article is more than 4 years old Maraga was largely correct about the judiciary budget and how many Kenyans are served per judge and magistrate in the country. The chief justice was also correct that the number of cases filed in Kenyan courts every year exceeds the number of cases the judiciary settles by as much as 100,000, causing an ever-growing backlog. But there isn’t evidence of a global average for comparing the number of judges and magistrates per population – there are too many variables in different legal systems. To mark the tenth anniversary of Kenya’s constitution , broadcaster NTV interviewed current and former government officials on how the law has been applied. Chief justice David Maraga told NTV that while the 2010 constitution had sought to strengthen the judiciary’s independence, funding was a perennial headache. “[Budget cuts] hit the judiciary sometimes to a point that its operations grind to a halt,” Maraga said in the interview , published in August 2020. In recent months the chief justice has been vocal on how cuts have hampered the delivery of judicial services. In his interview, Maraga made several claims. We looked into their accuracy. Claim The judiciary does not even get 1% of the national budget Verdict correct Maraga, who assumed office in 2016, asked for more funding as “the judiciary does not even get 1% of the national budget”. “We have said, over and over again, that for the judiciary to operate properly we should get at least 2.5% of the national budget,” he said . Africa Check has previously found there isn’t a “recommended global percentage” of funding for the judiciary from the national budget. In 2018 Maraga also claimed it was 2.5%. To determine how much has been allocated to the judiciary in recent years we consulted the appropriation acts, the laws that show budget allocations to government departments. For the national budget, we checked budget statements. Judiciary amounts as share of Kenya budget Year Judiciary budget (KSh billion) National budget (KSh trillion) Share 2014/15 17.5 1.58 1.1% 2015/16 16.7 2 0.8% 2016/17 17.3 2.3 0.8% 2017/18 17.6 2.3 0.8% 2018/19 14.5 2.6 0.6% 2019/20 18.9 2.8 0.7% 2020/21 17.4 2.8 0.6% Sources: Budget speeches for 2020 , 2019 , 2018 , 2017 , 2016 , 2015 and 2014 and Appropriations Acts for 2020, 2019 , 2018 , 2017 , 2016 , 2015 and 2014 . Note: The figures shown have been rounded up. Only once in the last seven financial years, in 2014/15, did the judiciary receive more than 1% of the national budget. We therefore rate this claim as correct. Claim We have an average of 400,000 cases being filed in our courts every year Verdict correct The most recent state of the judiciary report covers the 2018/19 financial year. Released in January 2020, it shows that more than two million cases were lodged in all courts between 2014/15 and 2018/19. The report said : “The number of filed cases provides quantitative information on the extent of demand for court services by the public.” Total number of cases filed in the judiciary Financial year Cases 2014/15 334,685 2015/16 460,961 2016/17 344,180 2017/18 402,243 2018/19 484,349 Average 405,283 The average number of cases filed in the period covered by the report works out to 405,283 a year. We therefore rate this claim as correct. Claim We only dispose of about 300,000 cases Verdict correct Discussing the country’s case backlog, Maraga said the judiciary settles about 300,000 cases every year. This number was determined by the number of judges and magistrates and would only continue to pile up. “Unless the judiciary is given enough resources to have enough manpower, Kenyans will continue crying about delayed cases,” he said . The most recent state of the judiciary report has data covering 2014/15 to 2018/19. It shows an average of 321,652 cases settled across the five financial years. As of 2018/19 there were 153 judges and 546 magistrates in Kenya. Number of cases resolved by the judiciary Financial year Cases 2014/15 272,605 2015/16 191,625 2016/17 304,182 2017/18 370,488 2018/19 469,359 Average 321,652 We therefore rate the claim as correct. Claim In Kenya now with a population of about 48 million, we have one judge serving over 300,000 people Verdict correct There are 47.6 million people in Kenya, according to 2019 census data. The most recent data from the judiciary shows there were 153 judges as of June 2019. This works out to one judge for every 311,000 people. We rate this claim as correct. Claim We have one magistrate serving over 77,000 people Verdict understated The most recent data from the judiciary shows there were 546 magistrates in Kenya as of June 2019. The state of the judiciary report was released in January 2020. Using a population of 47.6 million , this works out to one magistrate for every 87,114 people. The chief justice’s figure was off by over 10,000 but it was still “over 77,000” people per magistrate. We therefore rate it as understated. Claim There is a ‘global average’ for the number of judges and magistrates to number of people Verdict unproven A calculation for a “global average” can be achieved by directly comparing the number of judges and magistrates to the world population. But to account for population differences, rates (per 100,000 people) are widely used . ( Note: See box below for more context. ) The chief justice has in the past spoken of a “recommended global percentage” of funding for the judiciary. We have contacted the judiciary for the source of the "global average" cited by the chief justice and will update this report with their response. Wachira Maina is a constitutional lawyer in Kenya who has written about the progress of institutions, including the judiciary, following the adoption of the 2010 constitution. He directed us to the UN Office of Drug and Crime (UNODC) for data on the administration of justice professionals against a country’s population. It shows there were 1.3 judges or magistrates for every 100,000 people in Kenya in 2014, 3.6 for South Africa in 2015, and 0.8 for the US and 8.7 for China in 2017. But the UNODC noted key weaknesses in the data when comparing countries. “The numbers reported are not restricted to judges deciding criminal cases,” it said. “The comparability problem might get even worse because some countries might still only report the number of judges whose duty is the judgment of criminal cases. “Apart from this, it is not clear whether really all judges are included in the reported figures in all countries.” Without a source for the chief justice’s claim of a global average, we can only rate this final claim as unproven. Is calculating the ratio of judges and magistrates to the population useful? The ratio of judges and magistrates to the population is useful depending on what you’re using it to show, Wachira Maina , a constitutional lawyer in Kenya told Africa Check. He gave an example of using the ratio of the number of doctors to the population as a metric for access to health, and of police officers to measure access to security services. However, he said, ratio data leaves a lot unstated, such as the distribution by region and by urban and rural areas. Therefore “to determine access to services, you will almost certainly need additional information”. “A high ratio by itself does not prove that most people have access to services, merely that if services were equitably distributed, and they rarely are, more people would have access,” Maina said. “Keep in mind though that you cannot increase access unless you have the numbers, so the ratio does still say something useful.” Chris Kerkering is a litigation manager at Katiba Institute , an organisation in Nairobi that promotes the knowledge of Kenya’s constitution. He told Africa Check that population does not automatically equate to a judge’s caseload. A very litigious society would have more cases per population, he said. Caseload and caseload weighting, which Kerkering described as not only counting the number of cases but also being able to determine how much time each respective case would take , may be the best way to determine whether a judiciary has the appropriate number of judges. But since doing a comparison between different countries with different legal systems and different cultures would be near impossible, “judges per population is a decent aggregate”, Kerkering said. He said the chief justice’s focus was on access to justice. “If there are not enough judges and the staff that support them then they are unable to provide the services that the judiciary requires. Case backlogs become one of the more obvious problems. Fewer judges mean that each judge is taking more cases.” “The more cases a judge has, the more time it takes to get through them. Access to justice requires timely decisions. The phrase ‘justice delayed is justice denied,’ is so commonly used for a reason. Often, as a case winds its way through the court system, avoidable delays result in long term harm.” “A judiciary that can’t get through its caseload promptly can’t ensure access to justice as required by the constitution.” Carlos Mureithi is a journalist based in Nairobi, Kenya Further reading: https://africacheck.org/reports/budget-cuts-hit-kenyas-judiciary-but-theres-no-global-funding-target/ Republish our content for free We believe that everyone needs the facts. You can republish the text of this article free of charge, both online and in print. However, we ask that you pay attention to these simple guidelines . In a nutshell: 1. Do not include images, as in most cases we do not own the copyright. 2. Please do not edit the article. 3. Make sure you credit "Africa Check" in the byline and don't forget to mention that the article was originally published on africacheck.org . Name Surname Email Leave this field blank Carlos Mureithi Claim Six claims about the Kenyan judiciary, from its budget and number of cases to how many judges and magistrates serve Kenya’s population. Verdict Four correct, one understated and one unproven Source Kenya’s chief justice, David Maraga (August 2020) Join us on WhatsApp Further Reading false Nigeria Trump USAid funding No, Trump cut USAid funding to Nigeria – and elsewhere – because of US interests, not because of corrupt Nigerian politicians false South Africa HIV HIV/AIDS United States funding government false claim No, 100% of South Africa’s HIV/Aids funding does not come from the United States – mostly funded by the South African government Nigeria budget debt policing Osita Chidoka aviation minister Fact-checking former minister Osita Chidoka's claims on Nigeria's 2025 budget, debt and policing Add new comment Your name Comment About text formats Restricted HTML Allowed HTML tags: <a href hreflang> <em> <strong> <cite> <blockquote cite> <code> <ul type> <ol start type> <li> <dl> <dt> <dd> <h2 id> <h3 id> <h4 id> <h5 id> <h6 id> Lines and paragraphs break automatically. Web page addresses and email addresses turn into links automatically. limit: 600 characters Leave this field blank Sign up to our newsletter Name Africa Check values your trust and is committed to the responsible management, use and protection of personal information. See our privacy policy. Leave this field blank Spot Checks View All false Nigeria Trump USAid funding No, Trump cut USAid funding to Nigeria – and elsewhere – because of US interests, not because of corrupt Nigerian politicians false South Africa HIV HIV/AIDS United States funding government false claim No, 100% of South Africa’s HIV/Aids funding does not come from the United States – mostly funded by the South African government Nigeria budget debt policing Osita Chidoka aviation minister Fact-checking former minister Osita Chidoka's claims on Nigeria's 2025 budget, debt and policing We hold public figures accountable For democracy to function, public figures need to be held to account for what they say. The claims they make need to be checked, openly and impartially. Africa Check is an independent, non-partisan organisation which assesses claims made in the public arena using journalistic skills and evidence drawn from the latest online tools, readers, public sources and experts, sorting fact from fiction and publishing the results. Browse by category Health Covid-19 Education Crime Economy Kenya Nigeria Senegal South Africa Sign up to our newsletter Name Africa Check values your trust and is committed to the responsible management, use and protection of personal information. See our privacy policy. Leave this field blank Follow us Facebook Twitter Instagram TikTok Footer About Partner With Us Terms and Conditions Contact Us Sitemap Want to keep reading our fact-checks? We will never charge you for verified, reliable information. Help us keep it that way by supporting our work. Become a newsletter subscriber Name Africa Check values your trust and is committed to the responsible management, use and protection of personal information. See our privacy policy. Leave this field blank Support independent fact-checking in Africa. See our donation optionsFactchecking Kenya’s chief justice on judiciary funding and backlog of cases - Africa Check Skip to main content English Français Main navigation Fact-checks Reports Factsheets Guides Spot Checks Blog Meta programme fact-checks Republish our work Who we are Our team Our impact How we are funded Partners Get in touch What we do Info Finder African Fact-Checking Awards Corrections Fact-checking research Training Media Literacy Educator knowledge hub How we fact-check Corrections policy Code of principles How we rate claims Get Involved Donate Submit a claim to fact-check Partner with us Join our team Fact-checking tips Quizzes Donate Back to Africa Check Factchecking Kenya’s chief justice on judiciary funding and backlog of cases Published on 17 September 2020 Claim Six claims about the Kenyan judiciary, from its budget and number of cases to how many judges and magistrates serve Kenya’s population. Verdict Four correct, one understated and one unproven Source Kenya’s chief justice, David Maraga (August 2020) This article is more than 4 years old Maraga was largely correct about the judiciary budget and how many Kenyans are served per judge and magistrate in the country. The chief justice was also correct that the number of cases filed in Kenyan courts every year exceeds the number of cases the judiciary settles by as much as 100,000, causing an ever-growing backlog. But there isn’t evidence of a global average for comparing the number of judges and magistrates per population – there are too many variables in different legal systems. To mark the tenth anniversary of Kenya’s constitution , broadcaster NTV interviewed current and former government officials on how the law has been applied. Chief justice David Maraga told NTV that while the 2010 constitution had sought to strengthen the judiciary’s independence, funding was a perennial headache. “[Budget cuts] hit the judiciary sometimes to a point that its operations grind to a halt,” Maraga said in the interview , published in August 2020. In recent months the chief justice has been vocal on how cuts have hampered the delivery of judicial services. In his interview, Maraga made several claims. We looked into their accuracy. Claim The judiciary does not even get 1% of the national budget Verdict correct Maraga, who assumed office in 2016, asked for more funding as “the judiciary does not even get 1% of the national budget”. “We have said, over and over again, that for the judiciary to operate properly we should get at least 2.5% of the national budget,” he said . Africa Check has previously found there isn’t a “recommended global percentage” of funding for the judiciary from the national budget. In 2018 Maraga also claimed it was 2.5%. To determine how much has been allocated to the judiciary in recent years we consulted the appropriation acts, the laws that show budget allocations to government departments. For the national budget, we checked budget statements. Judiciary amounts as share of Kenya budget Year Judiciary budget (KSh billion) National budget (KSh trillion) Share 2014/15 17.5 1.58 1.1% 2015/16 16.7 2 0.8% 2016/17 17.3 2.3 0.8% 2017/18 17.6 2.3 0.8% 2018/19 14.5 2.6 0.6% 2019/20 18.9 2.8 0.7% 2020/21 17.4 2.8 0.6% Sources: Budget speeches for 2020 , 2019 , 2018 , 2017 , 2016 , 2015 and 2014 and Appropriations Acts for 2020, 2019 , 2018 , 2017 , 2016 , 2015 and 2014 . Note: The figures shown have been rounded up. Only once in the last seven financial years, in 2014/15, did the judiciary receive more than 1% of the national budget. We therefore rate this claim as correct. Claim We have an average of 400,000 cases being filed in our courts every year Verdict correct The most recent state of the judiciary report covers the 2018/19 financial year. Released in January 2020, it shows that more than two million cases were lodged in all courts between 2014/15 and 2018/19. The report said : “The number of filed cases provides quantitative information on the extent of demand for court services by the public.” Total number of cases filed in the judiciary Financial year Cases 2014/15 334,685 2015/16 460,961 2016/17 344,180 2017/18 402,243 2018/19 484,349 Average 405,283 The average number of cases filed in the period covered by the report works out to 405,283 a year. We therefore rate this claim as correct. Claim We only dispose of about 300,000 cases Verdict correct Discussing the country’s case backlog, Maraga said the judiciary settles about 300,000 cases every year. This number was determined by the number of judges and magistrates and would only continue to pile up. “Unless the judiciary is given enough resources to have enough manpower, Kenyans will continue crying about delayed cases,” he said . The most recent state of the judiciary report has data covering 2014/15 to 2018/19. It shows an average of 321,652 cases settled across the five financial years. As of 2018/19 there were 153 judges and 546 magistrates in Kenya. Number of cases resolved by the judiciary Financial year Cases 2014/15 272,605 2015/16 191,625 2016/17 304,182 2017/18 370,488 2018/19 469,359 Average 321,652 We therefore rate the claim as correct. Claim In Kenya now with a population of about 48 million, we have one judge serving over 300,000 people Verdict correct There are 47.6 million people in Kenya, according to 2019 census data. The most recent data from the judiciary shows there were 153 judges as of June 2019. This works out to one judge for every 311,000 people. We rate this claim as correct. Claim We have one magistrate serving over 77,000 people Verdict understated The most recent data from the judiciary shows there were 546 magistrates in Kenya as of June 2019. The state of the judiciary report was released in January 2020. Using a population of 47.6 million , this works out to one magistrate for every 87,114 people. The chief justice’s figure was off by over 10,000 but it was still “over 77,000” people per magistrate. We therefore rate it as understated. Claim There is a ‘global average’ for the number of judges and magistrates to number of people Verdict unproven A calculation for a “global average” can be achieved by directly comparing the number of judges and magistrates to the world population. But to account for population differences, rates (per 100,000 people) are widely used . ( Note: See box below for more context. ) The chief justice has in the past spoken of a “recommended global percentage” of funding for the judiciary. We have contacted the judiciary for the source of the "global average" cited by the chief justice and will update this report with their response. Wachira Maina is a constitutional lawyer in Kenya who has written about the progress of institutions, including the judiciary, following the adoption of the 2010 constitution. He directed us to the UN Office of Drug and Crime (UNODC) for data on the administration of justice professionals against a country’s population. It shows there were 1.3 judges or magistrates for every 100,000 people in Kenya in 2014, 3.6 for South Africa in 2015, and 0.8 for the US and 8.7 for China in 2017. But the UNODC noted key weaknesses in the data when comparing countries. “The numbers reported are not restricted to judges deciding criminal cases,” it said. “The comparability problem might get even worse because some countries might still only report the number of judges whose duty is the judgment of criminal cases. “Apart from this, it is not clear whether really all judges are included in the reported figures in all countries.” Without a source for the chief justice’s claim of a global average, we can only rate this final claim as unproven. Is calculating the ratio of judges and magistrates to the population useful? The ratio of judges and magistrates to the population is useful depending on what you’re using it to show, Wachira Maina , a constitutional lawyer in Kenya told Africa Check. He gave an example of using the ratio of the number of doctors to the population as a metric for access to health, and of police officers to measure access to security services. However, he said, ratio data leaves a lot unstated, such as the distribution by region and by urban and rural areas. Therefore “to determine access to services, you will almost certainly need additional information”. “A high ratio by itself does not prove that most people have access to services, merely that if services were equitably distributed, and they rarely are, more people would have access,” Maina said. “Keep in mind though that you cannot increase access unless you have the numbers, so the ratio does still say something useful.” Chris Kerkering is a litigation manager at Katiba Institute , an organisation in Nairobi that promotes the knowledge of Kenya’s constitution. He told Africa Check that population does not automatically equate to a judge’s caseload. A very litigious society would have more cases per population, he said. Caseload and caseload weighting, which Kerkering described as not only counting the number of cases but also being able to determine how much time each respective case would take , may be the best way to determine whether a judiciary has the appropriate number of judges. But since doing a comparison between different countries with different legal systems and different cultures would be near impossible, “judges per population is a decent aggregate”, Kerkering said. He said the chief justice’s focus was on access to justice. “If there are not enough judges and the staff that support them then they are unable to provide the services that the judiciary requires. Case backlogs become one of the more obvious problems. Fewer judges mean that each judge is taking more cases.” “The more cases a judge has, the more time it takes to get through them. Access to justice requires timely decisions. The phrase ‘justice delayed is justice denied,’ is so commonly used for a reason. Often, as a case winds its way through the court system, avoidable delays result in long term harm.” “A judiciary that can’t get through its caseload promptly can’t ensure access to justice as required by the constitution.” Carlos Mureithi is a journalist based in Nairobi, Kenya Further reading: https://africacheck.org/reports/budget-cuts-hit-kenyas-judiciary-but-theres-no-global-funding-target/ Republish our content for free We believe that everyone needs the facts. You can republish the text of this article free of charge, both online and in print. However, we ask that you pay attention to these simple guidelines . In a nutshell: 1. Do not include images, as in most cases we do not own the copyright. 2. Please do not edit the article. 3. Make sure you credit "Africa Check" in the byline and don't forget to mention that the article was originally published on africacheck.org . Name Surname Email Leave this field blank Carlos Mureithi Claim Six claims about the Kenyan judiciary, from its budget and number of cases to how many judges and magistrates serve Kenya’s population. Verdict Four correct, one understated and one unproven Source Kenya’s chief justice, David Maraga (August 2020) Join us on WhatsApp Further Reading false Nigeria Trump USAid funding No, Trump cut USAid funding to Nigeria – and elsewhere – because of US interests, not because of corrupt Nigerian politicians false South Africa HIV HIV/AIDS United States funding government false claim No, 100% of South Africa’s HIV/Aids funding does not come from the United States – mostly funded by the South African government Nigeria budget debt policing Osita Chidoka aviation minister Fact-checking former minister Osita Chidoka's claims on Nigeria's 2025 budget, debt and policing Add new comment Your name Comment About text formats Restricted HTML Allowed HTML tags: <a href hreflang> <em> <strong> <cite> <blockquote cite> <code> <ul type> <ol start type> <li> <dl> <dt> <dd> <h2 id> <h3 id> <h4 id> <h5 id> <h6 id> Lines and paragraphs break automatically. Web page addresses and email addresses turn into links automatically. limit: 600 characters Leave this field blank Sign up to our newsletter Name Africa Check values your trust and is committed to the responsible management, use and protection of personal information. See our privacy policy. Leave this field blank Spot Checks View All false Nigeria Trump USAid funding No, Trump cut USAid funding to Nigeria – and elsewhere – because of US interests, not because of corrupt Nigerian politicians false South Africa HIV HIV/AIDS United States funding government false claim No, 100% of South Africa’s HIV/Aids funding does not come from the United States – mostly funded by the South African government Nigeria budget debt policing Osita Chidoka aviation minister Fact-checking former minister Osita Chidoka's claims on Nigeria's 2025 budget, debt and policing We hold public figures accountable For democracy to function, public figures need to be held to account for what they say. The claims they make need to be checked, openly and impartially. Africa Check is an independent, non-partisan organisation which assesses claims made in the public arena using journalistic skills and evidence drawn from the latest online tools, readers, public sources and experts, sorting fact from fiction and publishing the results. Browse by category Health Covid-19 Education Crime Economy Kenya Nigeria Senegal South Africa Sign up to our newsletter Name Africa Check values your trust and is committed to the responsible management, use and protection of personal information. See our privacy policy. Leave this field blank Follow us Facebook Twitter Instagram TikTok Footer About Partner With Us Terms and Conditions Contact Us Sitemap Want to keep reading our fact-checks? We will never charge you for verified, reliable information. Help us keep it that way by supporting our work. Become a newsletter subscriber Name Africa Check values your trust and is committed to the responsible management, use and protection of personal information. See our privacy policy. Leave this field blank Support independent fact-checking in Africa. See our donation optionsKenya - Wikipedia Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Etymology 2 History Toggle History subsection 2.1 Prehistory 2.2 Swahili trade period 2.3 Early Portuguese presence 2.4 18th and 19th centuries 2.5 German Protectorate (1885–1890) 2.6 British Kenya (1888–1962) 2.7 Mau Mau Uprising 2.8 Somalis of Kenya referendum, 1962 2.9 Early independence period 2.10 First presidency 2.11 Moi era 2.12 Transition to multiparty democracy 2.13 President Kibaki and the road to a new constitution 2.14 Kenyatta and Ruto presidencies 3 Geography Toggle Geography subsection 3.1 Climate 3.2 Wildlife 4 Government and politics Toggle Government and politics subsection 4.1 2013 elections and new government 4.2 Foreign relations 4.3 Armed forces 4.4 Administrative divisions 4.5 Human rights 5 Economy Toggle Economy subsection 5.1 Tourism 5.2 Agriculture 5.3 Industry and manufacturing 5.4 Transport 5.5 Energy 5.6 Chinese investment and trade 5.7 Vision 2030 5.8 Oil exploration 5.9 Action against pollution 5.10 Labour and human capital 5.11 Microfinance 6 Demographics Toggle Demographics subsection 6.1 Ethnic groups 6.2 Languages 6.3 Urban centres 6.4 Religion 6.5 Health 6.6 Women 6.7 Youth 6.8 Education 7 Culture Toggle Culture subsection 7.1 Literature 7.2 Music 7.3 Sports 7.4 Cuisine 8 See also 9 Notes 10 References 11 Sources and further reading 12 External links Toggle the table of contents Kenya 267 languages Acèh Адыгабзэ Afrikaans Alemannisch አማርኛ Anarâškielâ अंगिका Ænglisc Аԥсшәа العربية Aragonés Արեւմտահայերէն Arpetan অসমীয়া Asturianu अवधी Avañe'ẽ Aymar aru Azərbaycanca تۆرکجه Basa Bali Bamanankan বাংলা Banjar 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gú Basa Banyumasan Башҡортса Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) भोजपुरी Bikol Central Bislama Български Boarisch བོད་ཡིག Bosanski Brezhoneg Буряад Català Чӑвашла Cebuano Čeština Chavacano de Zamboanga ChiShona ChiTumbuka Corsu Cymraeg Dagbanli Dansk الدارجة Davvisámegiella Deutsch ދިވެހިބަސް Diné bizaad Dolnoserbski डोटेली ཇོང་ཁ Eesti Ελληνικά Эрзянь Español Esperanto Estremeñu Euskara Eʋegbe Farefare فارسی Fiji Hindi Føroyskt Français Frysk Fulfulde Gaeilge Gaelg Gagauz Gàidhlig Galego Gĩkũyũ ગુજરાતી गोंयची कोंकणी / Gõychi Konknni 客家語 / Hak-kâ-ngî 한국어 Hausa Hawaiʻi Հայերեն हिन्दी Hornjoserbsce Hrvatski Ido Igbo Ilokano বিষ্ণুপ্রিয়া মণিপুরী Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua Interlingue Ирон IsiZulu Íslenska Italiano עברית Jawa Kabɩyɛ ಕನ್ನಡ Kapampangan ქართული कॉशुर / کٲشُر Kaszëbsczi Қазақша Kernowek Ikinyarwanda Ikirundi Kiswahili Kongo Kotava Kreyòl ayisyen Kriyòl gwiyannen Kurdî Кыргызча Кырык мары Ladin Ladino Latgaļu Latina Latviešu Lëtzebuergesch Лезги Lietuvių Ligure Limburgs Lingála Lingua Franca Nova Livvinkarjala La .lojban. Luganda Lombard Magyar Madhurâ मैथिली Македонски Malagasy മലയാളം Malti Māori मराठी მარგალური مصرى مازِرونی Bahasa Melayu ꯃꯤꯇꯩ ꯂꯣꯟ Minangkabau 閩東語 / Mìng-dĕ̤ng-ngṳ̄ Mirandés Мокшень Монгол မြန်မာဘာသာ Naijá Nederlands Nedersaksies नेपाली नेपाल भाषा 日本語 Napulitano Нохчийн Nordfriisk Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Novial Occitan ଓଡ଼ିଆ Oromoo Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча ਪੰਜਾਬੀ पालि Pangasinan Pangcah پنجابی ပအိုဝ်ႏဘာႏသာႏ Papiamentu پښتو Patois ភាសាខ្មែរ Piemontèis Tok Pisin Plattdüütsch Polski Português Qaraqalpaqsha Qırımtatarca Română Runa Simi Русиньскый Русский Саха тыла Sakizaya Gagana Samoa संस्कृतम् Sängö ᱥᱟᱱᱛᱟᱲᱤ Sardu Scots Seediq Seeltersk Sesotho Sesotho sa Leboa Setswana Shqip Sicilianu සිංහල Simple English سنڌي SiSwati Slovenčina Slovenščina Ślůnski Soomaaliga کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Sunda Suomi Svenska Tagalog தமிழ் Taqbaylit Татарча / tatarça တႆး Tayal తెలుగు ไทย Thuɔŋjäŋ ትግርኛ Тоҷикӣ Türkçe Türkmençe Tyap Удмурт Українська اردو ئۇيغۇرچە / Uyghurche Vahcuengh Vèneto Vepsän kel’ Tiếng Việt Volapük Võro 文言 Winaray Wolof 吴语 Xitsonga ייִדיש Yorùbá 粵語 Zazaki Zeêuws Žemaitėška 中文 Obolo Betawi Fɔ̀ngbè Ghanaian Pidgin Kumoring Yerwa Kanuri Moore IsiNdebele seSewula Tolışi ⵜⴰⵎⴰⵣⵉⵖⵜ ⵜⴰⵏⴰⵡⴰⵢⵜ Edit links Article Talk English Read View source View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read View source View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikinews Wikiquote Wikivoyage Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Coordinates : 1°N 38°E ﻿ / ﻿ 1°N 38°E ﻿ / 1; 38 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Country in East Africa This article is about the country. For other uses, see Kenya (disambiguation) . Republic of Kenya Jamhuri ya Kenya ( Swahili ) Flag Coat of arms Motto: " Harambee " (English: "Let us all pull together" ) Anthem: " Ee Mungu Nguvu Yetu " (English: "O God of All Creation" ) Show globe Show map of Africa Capital and largest city Nairobi 1°16′S 36°48′E ﻿ / ﻿ 1.267°S 36.800°E ﻿ / -1.267; 36.800 Official languages Swahili English [ 1 ] National language Swahili [ 1 ] Ethnic groups (2019 census) [ 2 ] 17.13% Kikuyu 14.35% Luhya 13.37% Kalenjin 10.65% Luo 9.81% Kamba 5.85% Somali 5.68% Kisii 5.23% Mijikenda 4.15% Meru 13.78% others Religion (2019 census) [ 2 ] [ 3 ] 85.5% Christianity 10.9% Islam 1.5% no religion 0.7% traditional faiths 1.3% others Demonym(s) Kenyan Government Unitary presidential republic • President William Ruto • Deputy President Kithure Kindiki • Senate Speaker Amason Kingi • Assembly Speaker Moses Wetangula • Chief Justice Martha Koome Legislature Parliament • Upper house Senate • Lower house National Assembly Independence from the United Kingdom • Kilwa Sultanate 957–1513 • Omani control of Swahili coast 1698–1887 • Dominion 12 December 1963 • Republic 12 December 1964 • Current Constitution 27 August 2010 Area • Total 580,367 km 2 (224,081 sq mi) [ 4 ] [ 5 ] ( 48th ) • Water (%) 2.3 Population • 2024 estimate 52,428,290 [ 6 ] ( 28th ) • 2019 census 47,564,296 [ 7 ] • Density 82/km 2 (212.4/sq mi) ( 124th ) GDP ( PPP ) 2025 estimate • Total $401.97 billion [ 8 ] ( 59th ) • Per capita $7,530 [ 8 ] ( 142nd ) GDP (nominal) 2025 estimate • Total $131.67 billion [ 8 ] ( 59th ) • Per capita $2,470 [ 8 ] ( 150th ) Gini (2021) 38.7 [ 9 ] medium inequality HDI (2023) 0.628 [ 10 ] medium ( 143rd ) Currency Kenyan shilling ( KES ) Time zone UTC +3 ( East Africa Time ) Date format dd/mm/yy ( AD ) Calling code +254 ISO 3166 code KE Internet TLD .ke According to the CIA, estimates for this country explicitly take into account the effects of mortality because of AIDS; this can result in lower life expectancy, higher infant mortality and death rates, lower population and growth rates, and changes in the distribution of population by age and sex, than would otherwise be expected. [ 11 ] Kenya , [ a ] officially the Republic of Kenya , [ b ] is a country located in East Africa . With an estimated population of more than 52.4 million as of mid-2024, [ 13 ] Kenya is the 27th-most-populous country in the world [ 7 ] and the 7th most populous in Africa. Kenya's capital and largest city is Nairobi . Its second-largest and oldest city is Mombasa , a major port city located on Mombasa Island . Other major cities within the country include Kisumu , Nakuru & Eldoret .Going clockwise, Kenya is bordered by South Sudan to the northwest (though much of that border includes the disputed Ilemi Triangle ), Ethiopia to the north, Somalia to the east, the Indian Ocean to the southeast, Tanzania to the southwest, and Lake Victoria and Uganda to the west. Kenya's geography , climate and population vary widely. In western, rift valley counties, the landscape includes cold, snow-capped mountaintops (such as Batian, Nelion and Point Lenana on Mount Kenya ) with vast surrounding forests, wildlife and fertile agricultural regions to temperate climates. In other areas, there are dry, arid and semi-arid climates as well as absolute deserts (such as Chalbi Desert and Nyiri Desert ). Kenya's earliest inhabitants were hunter-gatherers , such as the present-day Hadza people . [ 14 ] [ 15 ] According to archaeological dating of associated artifacts and skeletal material, Cushitic speakers first settled in the region's lowlands between 3,200 and 1,300 BC, a phase known as the Lowland Savanna Pastoral Neolithic . Nilotic -speaking pastoralists (ancestral to Kenya's Nilotic speakers) began migrating from present-day South Sudan into Kenya around 500 BC. [ 16 ] Bantu people settled at the coast and the interior between 250 BC and 500 AD. [ 17 ] European contact began in 1500 AD with the Portuguese Empire , and effective colonisation of Kenya began in the 19th century during the European exploration of Africa . Modern-day Kenya emerged from a protectorate established by the British Empire in 1895 and the subsequent Kenya Colony , which began in 1920. Mombasa was the capital of the British East Africa Protectorate , [ 18 ] which included most of what is now Kenya and southwestern Somalia, from 1889 to 1907. Numerous disputes between the UK and the colony led to the Mau Mau revolution , which began in 1952, and the Kenya's declaration of independence in 1963. After independence, Kenya remained a member of the Commonwealth of Nations . The country's current constitution was adopted in 2010, replacing the previous 1963 constitution . Kenya is a presidential representative democratic republic, in which elected officials represent the people and the president is the head of state and government. [ 19 ] The country is a member of the United Nations , the Commonwealth , World Bank , International Monetary Fund , World Trade Organization , COMESA , International Criminal Court , as well as several other international organisations. It is also a major non-NATO ally of the United States . Kenya's economy is the largest in east and central Africa, with Nairobi serving as a major regional commercial hub. [ 20 ] With a Gross National Income of $2,110, [ 21 ] the country is a lower-middle-income economy. Agriculture is the country's largest economic sector; tea and coffee are the sector's traditional cash crops, while fresh flowers are a fast-growing export. The service industry , particularly tourism, is also one of the country's major economic drivers. Kenya is a member of the East African Community trade bloc, [ 22 ] [ 23 ] though some international trade organisations categorise it as part of the Greater Horn of Africa . [ 24 ] Africa is Kenya's largest export market, followed by the European Union. [ 25 ] Etymology The Republic of Kenya is named after Mount Kenya . The earliest recorded version of the modern name was written by German explorer Johann Ludwig Krapf in the 19th century. While travelling with a Kamba caravan led by the long-distance trader Chief Kivoi , Krapf spotted the mountain peak and asked what it was called. Kivoi told him " Kĩ-Nyaa " or " Kĩlĩma- Kĩinyaa ", probably because the pattern of black rock and white snow on its peaks reminded him of the feathers of the male ostrich. [ 26 ] In archaic Kikuyu , the word 'nyaga' or more commonly 'manyaganyaga' is used to describe an extremely bright object. The Agikuyu, who inhabit the slopes of Mt. Kenya, call it Kĩrĩma Kĩrĩnyaga (literally 'the mountain with brightness') in Kikuyu , while the Embu call it "Kirinyaa". All three names have the same meaning. [ 27 ] Ludwig Krapf recorded the name as both Kenia and Kegnia . [ 28 ] [ 29 ] [ 30 ] Some have said that this was a precise notation of the African pronunciation / ˈ k ɛ n j ə / . [ 31 ] An 1882 map drawn by Joseph Thompsons, a Scottish geologist and naturalist, indicated Mt. Kenya as Mt. Kenia. [ 26 ] The mountain's name was accepted, pars pro toto , as the name of the country. It did not come into widespread official use during the early colonial period, when the country was referred to as the East African Protectorate . The official name was changed to the Colony of Kenya in 1920. History Main article: History of Kenya For a chronological guide, see Timeline of Kenya . Prehistory Turkana Boy , a 1.6-million-year-old Homo erectus fossil Hominid species, such as Homo habilis (fl. 1.8 to 2.5 million years ago) and Homo erectus (fl. 1.9 million to 350,000 years ago), possibly the direct ancestors of modern Homo sapiens , had lived in Kenya in the Pleistocene epoch. [ 32 ] East Africa, including Kenya, is one of the earliest regions where modern humans ( Homo sapiens ) are believed to have lived. In 1984, during excavations at Lake Turkana palaeoanthropologist Richard Leakey , assisted by Kamoya Kimeu , had discovered the Turkana Boy , a 1.6-million-year-old Homo erectus fossil. Further evidence of Kenya's prehistory was found in 2018, namely the early emergence of modern behaviours , including long-distance trade networks (involving goods such as obsidian ), the use of pigments, and possibly the making of projectile points , about 320,000 years ago. The authors of three 2018 studies on the site suggest that complex and modern behaviours had already begun in Africa around the time of the emergence of Homo sapiens . [ 33 ] [ 34 ] [ 35 ] The first inhabitants of present-day Kenya were hunter-gatherer groups, akin to the modern Khoisan speakers. [ 36 ] These people were later largely replaced by agropastoralist Cushitic (ancestral to Kenya's Cushitic speakers), who originated from the Horn of Africa . [ 37 ] During the early Holocene , the region's climate shifted from drier to wetter conditions. This provided an opportunity for the development of cultural traditions such as agriculture and herding in a more favourable environment. [ 36 ] Around 500 BC, Nilotic -speaking pastoralists (ancestral to Kenya's present-day Nilotic speakers) started migrating from what is now southern Sudan into Kenya. [ 16 ] [ 38 ] [ 39 ] Today, the country's Nilotic ethnic groups include the Kalenjin , Samburu , Luo , Turkana , and Maasai . [ 40 ] By the first millennium AD, Bantu -speaking farmers had moved into the region, initially along the Kenyan coast . [ 41 ] The Bantus had originated in West Africa along the Benue River in what is now eastern Nigeria and western Cameroon . [ 42 ] The Bantu migration brought new developments in agriculture and ironworking to the region. [ 42 ] Today, the country's Bantu groups include the Kikuyu , Luhya , Kamba , Kisii , Meru , Kuria , Aembu , Ambeere , Wadawida -Watuweta, Wapokomo, and Mijikenda , among many others. Notable prehistoric sites in the interior of Kenya include the (possibly archaeoastronomical) site Namoratunga on the west side of Lake Turkana and the walled settlement of Thimlich Ohinga in Migori County . Swahili trade period Further information: Swahili culture and Sultanate of Zanzibar A traditional Swahili carved wooden door in Lamu The coastline of Kenya was home to communities of ironworkers and Bantu subsistence farmers, hunters, and fishers who supported the region's economy with agriculture, fishing, metal production, and trade with foreign countries. These communities formed the earliest city-states in the region, which were collectively known as Azania . [ 43 ] The Swahili people were of mixed African and Asian (particularly Persian) ancestry, as DNA evidence has revealed. [ 44 ] By the 1st century CE, many of the area's city-states, such as Mombasa , Malindi , and Zanzibar , began to establish trading relations with the Arabs . This led to increased economic growth of the Swahili states, the introduction of Islam , Arabic influences on the Swahili language , cultural diffusion , as well as the Swahili city-states becoming members of a larger trade network. [ 45 ] [ 46 ] Many historians had long believed that the city-states were established by Arab or Persian traders, but archaeological evidence has led scholars to recognise the city-states as an indigenous development which, though subjected to foreign influence due to trade, retained a Bantu cultural core. [ 47 ] The Kilwa Sultanate was a medieval sultanate centred at Kilwa , in modern-day Tanzania. At its height, its authority stretched over the entire length of the Swahili Coast , including Kenya. [ 48 ] Beginning in the 10th century, the rulers of Kilwa would go on to build elaborate coral mosques and introduce copper coinage. [ 49 ] Swahili, a Bantu language with Arabic , Persian , and other Middle-Eastern and South Asian loanwords , later developed as a lingua franca for trade between the different peoples. [ 43 ] Since the turn of the 20th century, Swahili has also adopted numerous loanwords and calques from English, many of which originated during the era of British colonial rule. [ 50 ] Early Portuguese presence Portuguese presence in Kenya lasted from 1498 until 1730. Mombasa was under Portuguese rule from 1593 to 1698 and again from 1728 to 1729. The Swahili built Mombasa into a major port city and established trade links with other nearby city-states, as well as commercial centres in Persia, Arabia, and even India. [ 51 ] By the 15th century, Portuguese voyager Duarte Barbosa wrote that "Mombasa is a place of great traffic and has a good harbour in which there are always moored small craft of many kinds and also great ships, both of which are bound from Sofala and others which come from Cambay and Melinde and others which sail to the island of Zanzibar." [ 52 ] One major city on the Kenyan coast is Malindi. It has been an important Swahili settlement since the 14th century, and the city once rivalled Mombasa for dominance in the African Great Lakes region. Malindi has traditionally been a friendly port city for foreign powers. In 1414, the Chinese trader and explorer Zheng He , representing the Ming Dynasty , visited the East African coast on one of his last ' treasure voyages '. [ 53 ] Malindi also welcomed the Portuguese explorer Vasco da Gama in 1498. In the 17th century, the Swahili coast was conquered by the Omani Arabs , who expanded the slave trade to meet the demands of plantations in Oman and Zanzibar. [ 54 ] Initially, these traders came mainly from Oman, but later many came from Zanzibar (such as Tippu Tip ). [ 55 ] In addition, the Portuguese started buying slaves from the Omani and Zanzibari traders in response to the interruption of the transatlantic slave trade by British abolitionists. 18th and 19th centuries During the 18th and 19th century, the Masai people moved into the central and southern Rift Valley plains of Kenya, from a region north of Lake Rudolf (now Lake Turkana ). Although there weren't many of them, they managed to conquer a great amount of land in the plains, where people did not put up much resistance. [ citation needed ] The Nandi peoples managed to oppose the Masai, while the Taveta peoples fled to the forests on the eastern edge of Mount Kilimanjaro , although they later were forced to leave the land due to the threat of smallpox . An outbreak of either rinderpest or pleuropneumonia greatly affected the Masai's cattle, while an epidemic of smallpox affected the Masai themselves. After the death of the Masai Mbatian , the chief laibon (medicine man), the Masai split into warring factions. The Masai caused much strife in the areas they conquered; however, cooperation between such groups as the Luo people , Luhya people , and Gusii people is evidenced by shared vocabulary for modern implements and similar economic regimes. [ 56 ] Although Arab traders remained in the area, trade routes were disrupted by the hostile Masai, though there was trade in ivory between these factions. [ 57 ] The first foreigners to successfully get past the Masai were Johann Ludwig Krapf and Johannes Rebmann , two German missionaries who established a mission in Rabai , not too far from Mombasa . The pair were the first Europeans to sight Mount Kenya . [ 58 ] German Protectorate (1885–1890) The German Empire established a protectorate over the Sultan of Zanzibar 's coastal possessions in 1885, followed by the arrival of the Imperial British East Africa Company in 1888. Imperial rivalry was prevented by the Heligoland–Zanzibar Treaty , so Germany handed its East African coastal holdings to Britain in 1890. British Kenya (1888–1962) Main article: Kenya Colony British East Africa in 1909 The transfer by Germany to Britain was followed by the building of the Uganda Railway passing through the country. [ 59 ] The building of the railway was resisted by some ethnic groups—notably the Nandi , led by Orkoiyot Koitalel Arap Samoei from 1890 to 1900—but the British eventually built it. The Nandi were the first ethnic group to be put in a native reserve to stop them from disrupting the building of the railway. [ 59 ] During the railway construction era, there was a significant influx of Indian workers, who provided the bulk of the skilled labour required for construction. [ 60 ] They and most of their descendants later remained in Kenya and formed the core of several distinct Indian communities, such as the Ismaili Muslim and Sikh communities. While building the railway through Tsavo , a number of the Indian railway workers and local African labourers were attacked by two lions known as the Tsavo maneaters . [ 61 ] At the outbreak of World War I in August 1914, the governors of British East Africa (as the protectorate was generally known) and German East Africa initially agreed on a truce in an attempt to keep the young colonies out of direct hostilities. But Lieutenant Colonel Paul von Lettow-Vorbeck , the German military commander, determined to tie down as many British resources as possible. Completely cut off from Germany, Lettow-Vorbeck conducted an effective guerrilla warfare campaign , living off the land, capturing British supplies, and remaining undefeated. He eventually surrendered in Northern Rhodesia (today Zambia) 14 days after the Armistice was signed in 1918. [ 60 ] The Kenya–Uganda Railway near Mombasa , about 1899 To chase von Lettow, the British deployed the British Indian Army troops from India but needed large numbers of porters to overcome the formidable logistics of transporting supplies far into the interior on foot. The Carrier Corps was formed and ultimately mobilised over 400,000 Africans, contributing to their long-term politicisation. [ 60 ] In 1920, the East Africa Protectorate was turned into a colony and renamed Kenya after its highest mountain. [ 59 ] During the early part of the 20th century, the interior central highlands were settled by British and other European farmers, who became wealthy farming coffee and tea. [ 62 ] One depiction of this period of change from a colonist's perspective is found in the memoir Out of Africa by Danish author Baroness Karen von Blixen-Finecke, published in 1937. By the 1930s, approximately 30,000 white settlers lived in the area and gained a political voice because of their contribution to the market economy. [ 60 ] The central highlands were already home to over a million members of the Kikuyu people, most of whom had no land claims in European terms and lived as itinerant farmers. To protect their interests, the settlers banned the growing of coffee and introduced a hut tax, and the landless were granted less and less land in exchange for their labour. A massive exodus to the cities ensued as their ability to make a living from the land dwindled. [ 60 ] By the 1950s, there were 80,000 white settlers living in Kenya. [ 63 ] Throughout World War II , Kenya was an important source of manpower and agriculture for the United Kingdom. Kenya itself was the site of fighting between Allied forces and Italian troops in 1940–41, when Italian forces invaded. Wajir and Malindi were bombed as well. Mau Mau Uprising Further information: Mau Mau Uprising A statue of Dedan Kimathi , a Kenyan leader with the Mau Mau who fought against the British colonial system in the 1950s From October 1952 to December 1959, Kenya was in a state of emergency arising from the Mau Mau rebellion against British rule. The Mau Mau, also known as the Kenya Land and Freedom Army, were primarily Kikuyu people. During the colonial administration's crackdown, over 11,000 freedom fighters had been killed, along with 100 British troops and 2,000 Kenyan loyalist soldiers. War crimes were committed on both sides of the conflict, including the publicised Lari massacre and the Hola massacre . The governor requested and obtained British and African troops, including the King's African Rifles . The British began counter-insurgency operations. In May 1953, General Sir George Erskine took charge as commander-in-chief of the colony's armed forces, with the personal backing of Winston Churchill . [ 64 ] The capture of Waruhiu Itote (nom de guerre "General China" ) on 15 January 1954 and the subsequent interrogation led to a better understanding of the Mau Mau command structure for the British. Operation Anvil opened on 24 April 1954, after weeks of planning by the army with the approval of the War Council. The operation effectively placed Nairobi under military siege. Nairobi's occupants were screened and suspected Mau Mau supporters moved to detention camps. More than 80,000 Kikuyu were held in detention camps without trial, often subject to brutal treatment. [ 65 ] The Home Guard formed the core of the government's strategy as it was composed of loyalist Africans, not foreign forces such as the British Army and King's African Rifles. [ 66 ] The capture of Dedan Kimathi on 21 October 1956 in Nyeri signified the ultimate defeat of the Mau Mau and essentially ended the military offensive. [ 64 ] During this period, substantial governmental changes to land tenure occurred. The most important of these was the Swynnerton Plan , which was used to both reward loyalists and punish Mau Mau. This left roughly 1/3rd of Kikuyu bereft of any tenancy land arrangement and thus propertyless at the time of independence. [ 67 ] Somalis of Kenya referendum, 1962 Further information: Somalis in Kenya Before Kenya got its independence, Somali ethnic people in present-day Kenya in the areas of Northern Frontier Districts petitioned Her Majesty's Government not to be included in Kenya. The colonial government decided to hold Kenya's first referendum in 1962 to check the willingness of Somalis in Kenya to join Somalia . [ 68 ] The result of the referendum showed that 86% of Somalis in Kenya wanted to join Somalia , yet the British colonial administration rejected the result and the Somalis remained in Kenya. [ 69 ] [ 70 ] Early independence period The first president and founding father of Kenya, Jomo Kenyatta The first direct elections for native Kenyans to the Legislative Council took place in 1957. Despite British hopes of handing power to "moderate" local rivals, it was the Kenya African National Union (KANU) of Jomo Kenyatta that formed a government. The Colony of Kenya and the Protectorate of Kenya each came to an end on 12 December 1963, with independence conferred on all of Kenya. The U.K. ceded sovereignty over the Colony of Kenya. The Sultan of Zanzibar agreed that simultaneous with independence for the colony, he would cease to have sovereignty over the Protectorate of Kenya so that all of Kenya would become one sovereign state. [ 71 ] [ 72 ] In this way, Kenya became an independent country under the Kenya Independence Act 1963 of the United Kingdom. On 12 December 1964, Kenya became a republic under the name "Republic of Kenya". [ 71 ] Concurrently, the Kenyan army fought the Shifta War against ethnic Somali rebels inhabiting the Northern Frontier District who wanted to join their kin in the Somali Republic to the north. [ 73 ] A ceasefire was eventually reached with the signing of the Arusha Memorandum in October 1967, but relative insecurity prevailed through 1969. [ 74 ] [ 75 ] To discourage further invasions, Kenya signed a defence pact with Ethiopia in 1969, which is still in effect. [ 76 ] [ 77 ] First presidency Further information: Presidency of Jomo Kenyatta and Jomo Kenyatta On 12 December 1964, the Republic of Kenya was proclaimed, and Jomo Kenyatta became Kenya's first president. [ 78 ] Under Kenyatta, corruption became widespread throughout the government, civil service, and business community. Kenyatta and his family were tied up with this corruption as they enriched themselves through the mass purchase of property after 1963. Their acquisitions in the Central, Rift Valley, and Coast Provinces aroused great anger among landless Kenyans. His family used his presidential position to circumvent legal or administrative obstacles to acquiring property. The Kenyatta family also heavily invested in the coastal hotel business, with Kenyatta personally owning the Leonard Beach Hotel. [ 79 ] Kenyatta's mixed legacy was highlighted at the 10-year anniversary of Kenya's independence. A December 1973 article in The New York Times praised Kenyatta's leadership and Kenya for emerging as a model of pragmatism and conservatism. Kenya's GDP had increased at an annual rate of 6.6%, higher than the population growth rate of more than 3%. [ 80 ] But Amnesty International responded to the article by stating the cost of the stability in terms of human rights abuses. The opposition party started by Oginga Odinga — Kenya People's Union (KPU)—was banned in 1969 after the Kisumu Massacre and KPU leaders were still in detention without trial in gross violation of the U.N. Declaration of Human Rights . [ 81 ] [ 82 ] The Kenya Students Union, Jehovah Witnesses and all opposition parties were outlawed. [ 81 ] Kenyatta ruled until his death on 22 August 1978. [ 83 ] Moi era Further information: Daniel arap Moi , Presidency of Daniel Moi , 1978 Kenyan presidential election , 1988 Kenyan general election , and 1992 Kenyan general election Daniel arap Moi , Kenya's second President, and George W. Bush , 2001 After Kenyatta died, Daniel arap Moi became president. He retained the presidency, running unopposed in elections held in 1979, 1983 ( snap elections ), and 1988, all of which were held under the single-party constitution. The 1983 elections were held a year early, and were a direct result of a failed military coup on 2 August 1982. The 1982 coup was masterminded by a low-ranking Air Force serviceman, Senior Private Hezekiah Ochuka , and was staged mainly by enlisted men of the Air Force. It was quickly suppressed by forces commanded by Chief of General Staff Mahamoud Mohamed , a veteran Somali military official. [ 84 ] They included the General Service Unit (GSU)—a paramilitary wing of the police—and later the regular police. On the heels of the Garissa Massacre of 1980, Kenyan troops committed the Wagalla massacre in 1984 against thousands of civilians in Wajir County . An official probe into the atrocities was later ordered in 2011. [ 85 ] [ clarification needed ] The election held in 1988 saw the advent of the mlolongo (queuing) system, where voters were supposed to line up behind their favoured candidates instead of casting a secret ballot. [ 86 ] This was seen as the climax of a very undemocratic regime and led to widespread agitation for constitutional reform. Several contentious clauses, including the one that allowed for only one political party, were changed in the following years. [ 87 ] Transition to multiparty democracy In 1991, Kenya transitioned to a multiparty political system after 26 years of single-party rule. On 28 October 1992, Moi dissolved parliament, five months before the end of his term. As a result, preparations began for all elective seats in parliament as well as the president. The election was scheduled to take place on 7 December 1992, but delays led to its postponement to 29 December. Apart from KANU, the ruling party, other parties represented in the elections included FORD Kenya and FORD Asili. This election was marked by large-scale intimidation of opponents and harassment of election officials. It resulted in an economic crisis propagated by ethnic violence as the president was accused of rigging electoral results to retain power. [ 88 ] [ 89 ] [ 90 ] This election was a turning point for Kenya as it signified the beginning of the end of Moi's leadership and the rule of KANU. Moi retained the presidency and George Saitoti became vice president. Although it held on to power, KANU won 100 seats and lost 88 seats to the six opposition parties. [ 88 ] [ 90 ] The 1992 elections marked the beginning of multiparty politics after more than 25 years of KANU rule. [ 88 ] Following skirmishes in the aftermath of the elections, 5,000 people were killed and another 75,000 displaced from their homes. [ 91 ] In the next five years, many political alliances were formed in preparation for the next elections. In 1994, Jaramogi Oginga Odinga died and several coalitions joined his FORD Kenya party to form a new party, United National Democratic Alliance. This party was plagued with disagreements. In 1995, Richard Leakey formed the Safina party, but it was denied registration until November 1997. [ 92 ] In 1996, KANU revised the constitution to allow Moi to remain president for another term. Subsequently, Moi stood for reelection and won a 5th term in 1997. [ 93 ] His win was strongly criticised by his major opponents, Kibaki and Odinga , as fraudulent. [ 92 ] [ 94 ] Following this win, Moi was constitutionally barred from another presidential term. Beginning in 1998, he attempted to influence the country's succession politics to have Uhuru Kenyatta elected in the 2002 elections. [ 95 ] President Kibaki and the road to a new constitution Further information: Mwai Kibaki , Presidency of Mwai Kibaki , 2002 Kenyan general election , and 2007 Kenyan general election Moi's plan to be replaced by Uhuru Kenyatta failed, and Mwai Kibaki , running for the opposition coalition "National Rainbow Coalition" ( NARC ), was elected president. David Anderson (2003) reports the elections were judged free and fair by local and international observers, and seemed to mark a turning point in Kenya's democratic evolution. [ 94 ] In 2005, Kenyans rejected a plan to replace the 1963 independence constitution with a new one. [ 96 ] As a result, the elections of 2007 took place following the procedure set by the old constitution. Kibaki was reelected in highly contested elections marred by political and ethnic violence . The main opposition leader, Raila Odinga, claimed the election was rigged and that he was the rightfully elected president. In the ensuing violence, 1,500 people were killed and another 600,000 internally displaced, making it the worst post-election violence in Kenya. To stop the death and displacement of people, Kibaki and Odinga agreed to work together, with the latter taking the position of a prime minister. [ 97 ] This made Odinga the second prime minister of Kenya . In July 2010, Kenya partnered with other East African countries to form the new East African Common Market within the East African Community . [ 98 ] In 2011, Kenya began sending troops to Somalia to fight the terror group Al-Shabaab . [ 99 ] In mid-2011, two consecutive missed rainy seasons precipitated the worst drought in East Africa in 60 years. The northwestern Turkana region was especially affected, [ 100 ] with local schools shut down as a result. [ 101 ] The crisis was reportedly over by early 2012 because of coordinated relief efforts. Aid agencies subsequently shifted their emphasis to recovery initiatives, including digging irrigation canals and distributing plant seeds. [ 102 ] In August 2010, Kenyans held a referendum and passed a new constitution , which limited presidential powers and devolved the central government. [ 92 ] Following the passage of the new constitution, Kenya became a presidential representative democratic republic, whereby the President of Kenya is both head of state and head of government , and of a multi-party system . The new constitution also states that executive powers are exercised by the executive branch of government, headed by the president, who chairs a cabinet composed of people chosen from outside parliament. Legislative power is vested exclusively in Parliament . The judiciary is independent of the executive and the legislature. Kenyatta and Ruto presidencies Main articles: Presidency of Uhuru Kenyatta and Presidency of William Ruto Uhuru Kenyatta In 2013, Kenya held its first general elections under the 2010 constitution. Uhuru Kenyatta won, though the result was unsuccessfully challenged at the Supreme Court by opposition leader Raila Odinga . [ 103 ] Kenyatta was re-elected in 2017 in another disputed election . Odinga accused the Independent Electoral and Boundaries Commission of mismanaging the election and Kenyatta and his party of rigging. The Supreme Court overturned the results in a landmark ruling that established its position as an independent check on the president. [ 104 ] [ 105 ] In the repeated election, Kenyatta won after Odinga refused to participate, citing irregularities. [ 106 ] [ 107 ] In March 2018, a historic handshake between Kenyatta and Odinga signaled a period of reconciliation followed by economic growth and increased stability. [ 108 ] [ 109 ] Between 2019 and 2021, the two combined efforts to promote major changes to the Kenyan constitution, labelled the "Building Bridges Initiative" (BBI). They said their efforts were to improve inclusion and overcome the country's election system that often resulted in post-election violence. [ 110 ] [ 111 ] The BBI proposal called for broad expansion of the legislative and executive branches, including the creation of a prime minister with two deputies and an official leader of the opposition, reverting to selecting cabinet ministers from among the elected Members of Parliament, establishing up to 70 new constituencies , and adding up to 300 unelected members of Parliament (under an " affirmative action " plan). [ 110 ] [ 111 ] Critics saw this as an attempt to reward political dynasties and blunt Deputy President Willian Ruto 's efforts to seek the presidency and bloat the government at a high cost to the debt-laded country. [ 110 ] [ 111 ] Ultimately, in May 2021, the Kenyan High Court ruled the BBI unconstitutional, because it was an effort of the government rather than a popular initiative . [ 110 ] [ 111 ] The court sharply criticized Kenyatta, laying out grounds for his being sued or even impeached . The ruling was seen as a major defeat for both Kenyatta and Odinga, but a boon to Odinga's future presidential-election rival, Ruto. [ 110 ] [ 111 ] In August 2021, Kenya's Court of Appeal upheld the High Court's judgement in an appeal from the BBI Secretariat . [ 112 ] Ruto narrowly won the 2022 presidential election , defeating Odinga to become Kenya's fifth president. [ 113 ] [ 114 ] In 2024, Ruto and the Kenya Kwanza coalition faced popular protests over the Kenyan Finance Bill 2024 . [ 115 ] Geography Main article: Geography of Kenya A map of Kenya. The label "Sudan" at upper left is now incorrect; the area is now part of South Sudan . A Köppen climate classification map of Kenya At 580,367 km 2 (224,081 sq mi), [ 11 ] Kenya is the world's 47th-largest country (after Madagascar ). It lies between latitudes 5°N and 5°S , and longitudes 34° and 42°E . From the coast on the Indian Ocean, the low plains rise to central highlands which are bisected by the Great Rift Valley , and fertile plateaus lie on either side, around Lake Victoria and to the east. [ 116 ] [ 117 ] The Kenyan Highlands are one of the most successful agricultural production regions in Africa. [ 118 ] The highlands are the site of the highest point in Kenya and the second highest peak on the continent: Mount Kenya , which reaches a height of 5,199 m (17,057 ft) and is the site of glaciers. Mount Kilimanjaro (5,895 m or 19,341 ft) can be seen from Kenya to the south of the Tanzanian border. Climate Kenya's climate varies from tropical along the coast to temperate inland to arid in the north and northeast parts of the country. The area receives a great deal of sunshine every month. It is usually cool at night and early in the morning inland at higher elevations. The "long rains" season occurs from March/April to May/June. The "short rains" season occurs from October to November/December. The rainfall is sometimes heavy and often falls in the afternoons and evenings. Climate change is altering the natural pattern of the rainfall period, causing an extension of the short rains, which has begat floods, [ 119 ] and reducing the drought cycle from every ten years to annual events, producing strong droughts such as the 2008–09 Kenya Drought . [ 120 ] The temperature remains high throughout these months of tropical rain. The hottest period is February and March, leading into the season of the long rains, and the coldest is in July, until mid-August. [ 121 ] Köppen climate classification map for Kenya for 1980–2016 2071–2100 map under the most intense climate change scenario . Mid-range scenarios are currently considered more likely. [ 122 ] [ 123 ] [ 124 ] Climate change is posing an increasing threat to global socioeconomic development and environmental sustainability. [ 125 ] Developing countries with low adaptive capacity and high vulnerability to the phenomenon are disproportionately affected. Climate change in Kenya is increasingly impacting the lives of Kenya's citizens and the environment . [ 125 ] Climate change has led to more frequent extreme weather events like droughts which last longer than usual, irregular and unpredictable rainfall, flooding and increasing temperatures. The effects of these climatic changes have made already existing challenges with water security , food security and economic growth even more difficult. Harvests and agricultural production which account for about 33% [ 126 ] of total Gross Domestic Product (GDP) [ 127 ] are also at risk. The increased temperatures, rainfall variability in arid and semi-arid areas, and strong winds associated with tropical cyclones have combined to create favourable conditions for the breeding and migration of pests. [ 128 ] An increase in temperature of up to 2.5 °C by 2050 is predicted to increase the frequency of extreme events such as floods and droughts . [ 125 ] Wildlife Main articles: Wildlife of Kenya and Environmental issues in Kenya Kenya has considerable land area devoted to wildlife habitats, including the Masai Mara , where blue wildebeest and other bovids participate in a large-scale annual migration . More than one million wildebeest and 200,000 zebras participate in the migration across the Mara River . [ 129 ] The "Big Five" game animals of Africa, that is the lion , leopard , buffalo , rhinoceros , and elephant , can be found in Kenya and in the Masai Mara in particular. A significant population of other wild animals, reptiles, and birds can be found in the national parks and game reserves in the country. The annual animal migration occurs between June and September, with millions of animals taking part, attracting valuable foreign tourism. Two million wildebeest migrate a distance of 2,900 kilometres (1,802 mi) from the Serengeti in neighbouring Tanzania to the Masai Mara [ 130 ] in Kenya, in a constant clockwise fashion, searching for food and water supplies. This Serengeti Migration of the wildebeest is listed among the Seven Natural Wonders of Africa . [ 131 ] Kenya had a 2019 Forest Landscape Integrity Index mean score of 4.2/10, ranking it 133rd globally out of 172 countries. [ 132 ] Government and politics Main article: Politics of Kenya Kenya's third president, Mwai Kibaki Kenya is a presidential representative democratic republic with a multi-party system . The president is both the head of state and head of government . Executive power is exercised by the government. Legislative power is vested in both the government and the National Assembly and the Senate . The Judiciary is independent of the executive and the legislature. There has been growing concern, especially during former president Daniel arap Moi's tenure, that the executive was increasingly meddling with the affairs of the judiciary. [ 133 ] Kenya has high levels of corruption according to Transparency International 's Corruption Perceptions Index (CPI), a metric which attempts to gauge the prevalence of public-sector corruption in various countries. In 2019, the nation placed 137th out of 180 countries in the index, with a score of 28 out of 100. [ 134 ] But there are several rather significant developments with regard to curbing corruption from the Kenyan government, for instance the establishment of a new and independent Ethics and Anti-Corruption Commission (EACC) . [ 135 ] The Supreme Court of Kenya building Following general elections held in 1997, the Constitution of Kenya Review Act, designed to pave the way for more comprehensive amendments to the Kenyan constitution, was passed by the national parliament. [ 136 ] In December 2002, Kenya held democratic and open elections, which were judged free and fair by most international observers. [ 137 ] The 2002 elections marked an important turning point in Kenya's democratic evolution in that power was transferred peacefully from the Kenya African National Union (KANU), which had ruled the country since independence, to the National Rainbow Coalition (NARC), a coalition of political parties. Under the presidency of Mwai Kibaki , the new ruling coalition promised to focus its efforts on generating economic growth, combating corruption, improving education, and rewriting its constitution. A few of these promises have been met. There is free primary education. [ 138 ] In 2007, the government issued a statement declaring that from 2008, secondary education would be heavily subsidised, with the government footing all tuition fees. [ 139 ] 2013 elections and new government Main articles: Kenyan general election, 2013 and Kenyan local elections, 2013 Under the new constitution and with President Kibaki prohibited by term limits from running for a third term, Deputy Prime Minister Uhuru Kenyatta ran for office. He won with 50.51% of the vote in March 2013. In December 2014, President Kenyatta signed a Security Laws Amendment Bill, which supporters of the law suggested was necessary to guard against armed groups. Opposition politicians, human rights groups, and nine Western countries criticised the security bill, arguing that it infringed on democratic freedoms. The governments of the United States , the United Kingdom , Germany , and France also collectively issued a press statement cautioning about the law's potential impact. Through the Jubilee Coalition, the Bill was later passed on 19 December in the National Assembly under acrimonious circumstances. [ 140 ] Foreign relations Main article: Foreign relations of Kenya President Barack Obama in Nairobi, July 2015 Kenya has close ties with its fellow Swahili -speaking neighbours in the African Great Lakes region. Relations with Uganda and Tanzania are generally strong, as the three nations work toward economic and social integration through common membership in the East African Community . Relations with Somalia have historically been tense, although there has been some military co-ordination against Islamist insurgents. Kenya has good relations with the United Kingdom. [ 141 ] Kenya is one of the most pro-American nations in Africa, and the wider world. [ 142 ] With International Criminal Court trial dates scheduled in 2013 for both President Kenyatta and Deputy President William Ruto related to the 2007 election aftermath, US president Barack Obama , who is half-Kenyan, chose not to visit the country during his mid-2013 African trip . [ 143 ] Later in the summer, Kenyatta visited China at the invitation of President Xi Jinping after a stop in Russia and not having visited the United States as president. [ 144 ] In July 2015, Obama visited Kenya, the first American president to visit the country while in office. [ 145 ] The British Army Training Unit Kenya (BATUK) is used for the training of British infantry battalions in the arid and rugged terrain of the Great Rift Valley . [ 146 ] [ 147 ] Armed forces Main article: Kenya Defence Forces Emblem of the Kenya Defence Forces The Kenya Defence Forces are the armed forces of Kenya. The Kenya Army , Kenya Navy , and Kenya Air Force compose the National Defence Forces. The current Kenya Defence Forces were established, and its composition laid out, in Article 241 of the 2010 Constitution of Kenya ; the KDF is governed by the Kenya Defence Forces Act of 2012. [ 148 ] The President of Kenya is the commander-in-chief of all the armed forces. The armed forces are regularly deployed in peacekeeping missions around the world. Further, in the aftermath of the national elections of December 2007 and the violence that subsequently engulfed the country, a commission of inquiry, the Waki Commission , commended its readiness and adjudged it to "have performed its duty well." [ 149 ] Nevertheless, there have been serious allegations of human rights violations, most recently while conducting counter-insurgency operations in the Mt Elgon area [ 150 ] and also in the district of Mandera central. [ 151 ] Kenya's armed forces, like many government institutions in the country, have been tainted by corruption allegations. Because the operations of the armed forces have been traditionally cloaked by the ubiquitous blanket of "state security", the corruption has been hidden from public view, and thus less subject to public scrutiny and notoriety. This has changed recently. In what are by Kenyan standards unprecedented revelations, in 2010, credible claims of corruption were made with regard to recruitment [ 152 ] and procurement of armoured personnel carriers. [ 153 ] Further, the wisdom and prudence of certain decisions of procurement have been publicly questioned. [ 154 ] Administrative divisions Main articles: Counties of Kenya and Divisions of Kenya Kenya's 47 counties Kenya is divided into 47 semi-autonomous counties that are headed by governors. These 47 counties form the first-order divisions of Kenya. The smallest administrative units in Kenya are called locations . Locations often coincide with electoral wards. Locations are usually named after their central villages/towns. Many larger towns consist of several locations. Each location has a chief, appointed by the state. Constituencies are an electoral subdivision, with each county comprising a whole number of constituencies. An interim boundaries commission was formed in 2010 to review the constituencies and in its report, it recommended the creation of an additional 80 constituencies. Previous to the 2013 elections, there were 210 constituencies in Kenya . [ 155 ] Human rights See also: Human rights in Kenya , LGBT rights in Kenya , and Human trafficking in Kenya Homosexual acts are illegal in Kenya and typically punishable by up to 14 years in prison. [ 156 ] According to a 2020 survey by the Pew Research Center , 83% of Kenyans believe that homosexuality should not be accepted by society. [ 157 ] While addressing a joint press conference together with President Barack Obama in 2015, President Kenyatta declined to assure Kenya's commitment to gay rights, saying that "the issue of gay rights is really a non-issue... But there are some things that we must admit we don't share. Our culture, our societies don't accept." [ 158 ] In November 2008, WikiLeaks brought wide international attention to The Cry of Blood report, which documents the extrajudicial killing of gangsters by the Kenyan police. In the report, the Kenya National Commission on Human Rights (KNCHR) reported these in their key finding "e)", stating that the forced disappearances and extrajudicial killings appeared to be official policy sanctioned by the political leadership and the police. [ 159 ] [ 160 ] Economy Main article: Economy of Kenya Kenya's macroeconomic outlook has steadily posted robust growth over the past few decades mostly from road , rail , air and water transport infrastructure projects as well as massive investments in Information and Communication Technology . The Kenyan economy is the largest in East Africa. After independence, Kenya promoted rapid economic growth through public investment, encouraged smallholder agricultural production and provided incentives for private industrial investment. Kenya is East Africa's regional transportation and financial hub. Kenya's financial sector is vibrant, well developed and diversified boasting the highest financial inclusion in the region and globally. [ 161 ] Foreign investments in Kenya remain relatively weak considering the size of its economy and its level of development. As of 2022, Kenya's total FDI stock stood at US$10.4 billion, accounting for a mere 9.5% of the country's GDP. [ 162 ] Kenya has a Human Development Index (HDI) of 0.555 (medium), ranked 145 out of 186 in the world. As of 2005 [update] , 17.7% of Kenyans lived on less than $1.25 a day. [ 163 ] Based on the most recent data from 2014, 37.5% of the population is affected by multidimensional poverty and an additional 35.8% vulnerable to it. [ 164 ] In 2017, Kenya ranked 92nd in the World Bank ease of doing business rising from 113rd in 2016 (of 190 countries). [ 165 ] The important agricultural sector is one of the least developed and largely inefficient, employing 75% of the workforce compared to less than 3% in the food secure developed countries . Kenya is usually classified as a frontier market or occasionally an emerging market , but it is not one of the least developed countries . The economy has seen much expansion, seen by strong performance in tourism, higher education and telecommunications and decent post-drought results in agriculture, especially the vital tea sector. [ 166 ] Kenya's economy grew by more than 7% in 2007, and its foreign debt was greatly reduced. [ 166 ] This changed immediately after the disputed presidential election of December 2007, following the chaos which engulfed the country. Telecommunications and financial activity over the last decade now comprise 62% of GDP. 22% of GDP still comes from the unreliable agricultural sector which employs 75% of the labour force (a characteristic of under-developed economies that have not attained food security ). A small portion of the population relies on food aid. [ 167 ] Industry and manufacturing is the smallest sector, accounting for 16% of GDP. The services, industry and manufacturing sectors only employ 25% of the labour force but contribute 75% of GDP. [ 166 ] Kenya also exports textiles worth over $400 million under AGOA . Privatisation of state corporations like the defunct Kenya Post and Telecommunications Company, which resulted in East Africa's most profitable company— Safaricom , has led to their revival because of massive private investment. As of May 2011 [update] , economic prospects are positive with 4–5% GDP growth expected, largely because of expansions in tourism , telecommunications , transport, construction, and a recovery in agriculture . The World Bank estimated growth of 4.3% in 2012. [ 168 ] Kenya, trends in the Human Development Index 1970–2010 In March 1996 the presidents of Kenya, Tanzania, and Uganda re-established the East African Community (EAC). The EAC's objectives include harmonising tariffs and customs regimes, free movement of people and improving regional infrastructures. In March 2004, the three East African countries signed a Customs Union Agreement . Kenya has a more developed financial services sector than its neighbours. The Nairobi Securities Exchange (NSE) is ranked 4th in Africa in terms of market capitalisation. The Kenyan banking system is supervised by the Central Bank of Kenya (CBK). As of late July 2004, the system consisted of 43 commercial banks (down from 48 in 2001) and several non-bank financial institutions including mortgage companies, four savings and loan associations and several core foreign-exchange bureaus. [ 166 ] The inaugural Kenya Innovation Week (KIW) was started in 2021, from December 6th to 10th, 2021, at the Kenya School of Government in Lower Kabete, Nairobi. [ 169 ] [ 170 ] Tourism Main article: Tourism in Kenya Amboseli National Park Tsavo East National Park Tourism in Kenya is the third-largest source of foreign exchange revenue following diaspora remittances and agriculture. [ 171 ] The Kenya Tourism Board is responsible for maintaining information pertaining to tourism in Kenya. [ 172 ] [ 173 ] The main tourist attractions are photo safaris through the 60 national parks and game reserves. Other attractions include the wildebeest migration at the Masaai Mara , which is considered to be the 7th wonder of the world; historical mosques, and colonial-era forts at Mombasa , Malindi , and Lamu ; renowned scenery such as the white-capped Mount Kenya and the Great Rift Valley ; tea plantations at Kericho ; coffee plantations at Thika ; a splendid view of Mount Kilimanjaro across the border into Tanzania; and the beaches along the Swahili Coast , in the Indian Ocean . Tourists, the largest number being from Germany and the United Kingdom , are attracted mainly to the coastal beaches and the game reserves , notably, the expansive East and Tsavo West National Park , 20,808 square kilometres (8,034 sq mi) to the southeast. [ citation needed ] Agriculture Main article: Agriculture in Kenya Tea farm near Kericho , Kericho County Agriculture is the second largest contributor to Kenya's gross domestic product (GDP) after the service sector. In 2005, agriculture, including forestry and fishing, accounted for 24% of GDP, as well as for 18% of wage employment and 50% of revenue from exports. The principal cash crops are tea, horticultural produce, and coffee. Horticultural produce and tea are the main growth sectors and the two most valuable of all of Kenya's exports. The production of major food staples such as corn is subject to sharp weather-related fluctuations. Production downturns periodically necessitate food aid—for example in 2004, due to one of Kenya's intermittent droughts . [ 174 ] A consortium led by the International Crops Research Institute for the Semi-Arid Tropics ( ICRISAT ) has had some success in helping farmers grow new pigeon pea varieties instead of maize, in particularly dry areas. Pigeon peas are very drought-resistant, so can be grown in areas with less than 650 millimetres (26 in) annual rainfall. Successive projects encouraged the commercialisation of legumes by stimulating the growth of local seed production and agro-dealer networks for distribution and marketing. This work, which included linking producers to wholesalers, helped to increase local producer prices by 20–25% in Nairobi and Mombasa. The commercialisation of the pigeon pea is now enabling some farmers to buy assets ranging from mobile phones to productive land and livestock, and is opening pathways for them to move out of poverty. [ 175 ] Tea, coffee, sisal, pyrethrum, corn, and wheat are grown in the fertile highlands, one of the most successful agricultural production regions in Africa. [ 118 ] Livestock predominates in the semi-arid savanna to the north and east. Coconuts , pineapples , cashew nuts , cotton, sugarcane , sisal , and corn are grown in the lower-lying areas. Kenya has not attained the level of investment and efficiency in agriculture that can guarantee food security, and coupled with resulting poverty (53% of the population lives below the poverty line), a significant portion of the population regularly starves and is heavily dependent on food aid. [ 167 ] Poor roads, an inadequate railway network, under-used water transport, and expensive air transport have isolated mostly arid and semi-arid areas, and farmers in other regions often leave food to rot in the fields because they cannot access markets. This was last seen in August and September 2011, prompting the Kenyans for Kenya initiative by the Red Cross . [ 176 ] Agricultural countryside in Kenya Kenya's irrigation sector is categorised into three organizational types: smallholder schemes, centrally-managed public schemes, and private/commercial irrigation schemes. The smallholder schemes are owned, developed, and managed by individuals or groups of farmers operating as water users or self-help groups. Irrigation is carried out on individual or on group farms averaging 0.1–0.4 ha. There are about 3,000 smallholder irrigation schemes covering a total area of 47,000 ha. The country has seven large, centrally managed irrigation schemes, namely Mwea, Bura , Hola , Perkera , West Kano, Bunyala, and Ahero , covering a total area of 18,200 ha and averaging 2,600 ha per scheme. These schemes are managed by the National Irrigation Board and account for 18% of irrigated land area in Kenya. Large-scale private commercial farms cover 45,000 hectares, accounting for 40% of irrigated land. They utilise high technology and produce high-value crops for the export market, especially flowers and vegetables. [ 177 ] Kenya is the world's 3rd largest exporter of cut flowers . [ 178 ] Roughly half of Kenya's 127 flower farms are concentrated around Lake Naivasha , 90 kilometres northwest of Nairobi. [ 178 ] To speed their export, Nairobi airport has a terminal dedicated to the transport of flowers and vegetables. [ 178 ] Industry and manufacturing The Kenya Commercial Bank office at KENCOM House (right) in Nairobi Although Kenya is a low middle-income country, manufacturing accounts for 14% of the GDP, with industrial activity concentrated around the three largest urban centres of Nairobi , Mombasa , and Kisumu , and is dominated by food-processing industries such as grain milling, beer production, sugarcane crushing, and the fabrication of consumer goods, e.g., vehicles from kits. Kenya also has a cement production industry. [ 179 ] Kenya has an oil refinery that processes imported crude petroleum into petroleum products, mainly for the domestic market. In addition, a substantial and expanding informal sector commonly referred to as jua kali engages in small-scale manufacturing of household goods, auto parts, and farm implements. [ 180 ] [ 181 ] Kenya's inclusion among the beneficiaries of the US Government's African Growth and Opportunity Act ( AGOA ) has given a boost to manufacturing in recent years. Since AGOA took effect in 2000, Kenya's clothing sales to the United States increased from US$44 million to US$270 million (2006). [ 182 ] Other initiatives to strengthen manufacturing have been the new government's favourable tax measures, including the removal of duty on capital equipment and other raw materials. [ 183 ] In 2023, Kenya is in the process of constructing five industrial parks that will operate tax-free, with an anticipated completion date set for 2030. There are intentions to develop an additional 20 industrial parks in the future. [ 184 ] Transport Main article: Transport in Kenya Two trans-African automobile routes pass through Kenya: the Cairo-Cape Town Highway and the Lagos-Mombasa Highway , so the country has an extensive road network of paved and unpaved roads. Kenya's railway system links the nation's ports and major cities, connecting it with neighbouring Uganda. There are 15 airports which have paved runways. Energy Main article: Energy in Kenya Workers at Olkaria Geothermal Power Plant The largest share of Kenya's electricity supply comes from geothermal energy, [ 185 ] followed by hydroelectric stations at dams along the upper Tana River , as well as the Turkwel Gorge Dam in the west. A petroleum-fired plant on the coast, geothermal facilities at Olkaria (near Nairobi), and electricity imported from Uganda make up the rest of the supply. A 2,000 MW powerline from Ethiopia is nearing completion. Kenya's installed capacity increased from 1,142 megawatts between 2001 and 2003 to 2,341 in 2016. [ 186 ] The state-owned Kenya Electricity Generating Company (KenGen) , established in 1997 under the name of Kenya Power Company, handles the generation of electricity, while Kenya Power handles the electricity transmission and distribution system in the country. Shortfalls of electricity occur periodically, when drought reduces water flow. To become energy sufficient, Kenya has installed wind power and solar power (over 300 MW each), and aims to build a nuclear power plant by 2027. [ 187 ] [ 188 ] Kenya has proven deposits of oil in Turkana . Tullow Oil estimates the country's oil reserves to be around one billion barrels. [ 189 ] Exploration is still continuing to determine whether there are more reserves. Kenya currently imports all crude petroleum requirements. It has no strategic reserves and relies solely on oil marketers' 21-day oil reserves required under industry regulations. Petroleum accounts for 20% to 25% of the national import bill. [ 190 ] Chinese investment and trade Published comments on Kenya's Capital FM website by Liu Guangyuan, China's ambassador to Kenya , at the time of President Kenyatta's 2013 trip to Beijing, said, "Chinese investment in Kenya ... reached $474 million, representing Kenya's largest source of foreign direct investment, and ... bilateral trade ... reached $2.84 billion" in 2012. Kenyatta was "[a]ccompanied by 60 Kenyan business people [and hoped to] ... gain support from China for a planned $2.5 billion railway from the southern Kenyan port of Mombasa to neighbouring Uganda, as well as a nearly $1.8 billion dam", according to a statement from the president's office, also at the time of the trip. [ 144 ] Base Titanium, a subsidiary of Base resources of Australia, shipped its first major consignment of minerals to China. About 25,000 tonnes of ilmenite was flagged off the Kenyan coastal town of Kilifi. The first shipment was expected to earn Kenya about KSh.15–20 billion/= in earnings. [ 191 ] In 2014, the Chinese contracted railway project from Nairobi to Mombasa was suspended due to a dispute over compensation for land acquisition. [ 192 ] Vision 2030 The official logo of Vision 2030 In 2007, the Kenyan government unveiled Vision 2030 , an economic development programme it hopes will put the country in the same league as the Asian Economic Tigers by 2030. In 2013, it launched a National Climate Change Action Plan, having acknowledged that omitting climate as a key development issue in Vision 2030 was an oversight failure. The 200-page Action Plan, developed with support from the Climate & Development Knowledge Network , sets out the Government of Kenya's vision for a 'low-carbon climate resilient development pathway'. At the launch in March 2013, the Secretary of the Ministry of Planning, National Development, and Vision 2030 emphasized that climate would be a central issue in the renewed Medium-Term Plan that would be launched in the coming months. This would create a direct and robust delivery framework for the Action Plan and ensure climate change is treated as an economy-wide issue. [ 193 ] Furthermore, Kenya submitted an updated, more ambitious NDC on 24 December 2020, with a commitment to abate greenhouse gases by 32 percent by 2030 relative to the business-as-usual scenario and in line with its sustainable development agenda and national circumstances. [ 194 ] Economic summary GDP $41.84 billion (2012) at Market Price. $76.07 billion (Purchasing Power Parity, 2012) There exists an informal economy that is never counted as part of the official GDP figures. Annual growth rate 5.1% (2012) Per capita income Per Capita Income (PPP)= $1,800 Agricultural produce tea, coffee, corn , wheat, sugarcane , fruit, vegetables, dairy products, beef, pork, poultry, eggs Industry small-scale consumer goods (plastic, furniture, batteries, textiles, clothing, soap, cigarettes, flour), agricultural products, horticulture, oil refining; aluminium, steel, lead; cement, commercial ship repair, tourism Trade in 2012 Exports $5.942 billion tea, coffee, horticultural products, petroleum products, cement, fish Major markets Uganda 9.9%, Tanzania 9.6%, Netherlands 8.4%, UK, 8.1%, US 6.2%, Egypt 4.9%, Democratic Republic of the Congo 4.2% (2012) [ 11 ] Imports $14.39 billion machinery and transportation equipment, petroleum products, motor vehicles, iron and steel, resins and plastics Major suppliers China 15.3%, India 13.8%, UAE 10.5%, Saudi Arabia 7.3%, South Africa 5.5%, Japan 4.0% (2012) [ 11 ] Oil exploration See also: Oil in Kenya Lake Turkana borders Turkana County. Kenya has proven oil deposits in Turkana County . President Mwai Kibaki announced on 26 March 2012 that Tullow Oil , an Anglo-Irish oil exploration firm, had struck oil, but its commercial viability and subsequent production would take about three years to confirm. [ 195 ] Early in 2006, Chinese president Hu Jintao signed an oil exploration contract with Kenya, part of a series of deals designed to keep Africa's natural resources flowing to China's rapidly expanding economy. A family of lions in Maasai Mara The deal allowed for China's state-controlled offshore oil and gas company, CNOOC , to prospect for oil in Kenya, which is just beginning to drill its first exploratory wells on the borders of Sudan and the disputed area of North Eastern Province , on the border with Somalia and in coastal waters. There are formal estimates of the possible reserves of oil discovered. [ 196 ] Action against pollution In 2017, Kenya banned single-use plastic bags. According to the national environmental authority, 80% of the public has adhered to this ban. Subsequently, in 2020, the prohibition of single-use plastics was extended to protected areas, including parks and forests. [ 197 ] A law passed in July 2023 mandates companies to actively reduce the pollution and environmental impact caused by the products they introduce into the Kenyan market, either individually or through collective schemes. Unlike previous practices, businesses are now obligated to participate in waste collection and recycling initiatives, such the Petco initiative established by the government in 2018. [ 197 ] Labour and human capital Kenya has a labour force of around 24 million and a total labour force participation rate of 74%, the unemployment rate in 2022 was estimated at 5.6% [ 198 ] According to the World Bank's 2019 Human Capital Index (HCI), which measured human capital of the next generation, Kenya ranked first in sub-Saharan Africa with an HCI score of 0.52. The index combined several key indicators, which are school enrolment, child survival, quality of learning, healthy growth and adult survival into a single index ranging between 0–1. [ 199 ] Microfinance Main article: Microfinance in Kenya More than 20 institutions offer business loans on a large scale, specific agriculture loans, education loans, and loans for other purposes. Additionally, there are: emergency loans, which are more expensive in respect to interest rates, but are quickly available group loans for smaller groups (four to five members) and larger groups (up to 30 members) women's loans, which are also available to groups of women Out of approximately 40 million Kenyans, about 14 million are unable to receive financial service through formal loan application services, and an additional 12 million have no access to financial service institutions at all. Further, one million Kenyans are reliant on informal groups for receiving financial aid. [ 200 ] To mitigate this problem, the mobile banking service M-Pesa was launched in 2007 by Vodafone and Safaricom , in collaboration from the Financial Deepening Challenge Fund competition established by the UK government's Department for International Development. M-Pesa allows users to deposit, withdraw, transfer money, pay for goods and services (Lipa na M-Pesa), access credit and savings, all with a mobile device, [ 201 ] has provided access to digital transactions to millions of Kenyans in poverty situation. [ 202 ] Demographics Main article: Demographics of Kenya A Bantu Kikuyu woman in traditional attire Population [ 203 ] [ 204 ] Year Million 1948 5.4 1962 8.3 1969 10.9 2000 31.4 2021 53 The census carried out by the Kenya National Bureau of Statistics in 2019 reported Kenya's population as 47,564,296. [ 7 ] The country has a young population, with 73% of residents under 30 because of rapid population growth , [ 205 ] [ 206 ] from 2.9 million to 40 million inhabitants over the last century. [ 207 ] Nairobi is home to Kibera , one of the world's largest slums. The shantytown is believed to house between 170,000 [ 208 ] and one million people. [ 209 ] The UNHCR base in Dadaab in the north houses around 500,000. [ 210 ] Ethnic groups Kenya has a diverse population that includes many of Africa's major ethnoracial and linguistic groups. Although there is no official list of Kenyan ethnic groups, the number of ethnic categories and sub-categories recorded in the country's census has changed significantly over time, expanding from 42 in 1969 to more than 120 in 2019. [ 211 ] Most residents are Bantus (60%) or Nilotes (30%). [ 212 ] Cushitic groups also form a small ethnic minority, as do Arabs, Indians, and Europeans. [ 212 ] [ 213 ] According to the Kenya National Bureau of Statistics (KNBS), in 2019, the largest native ethnic groups were the Kikuyu (8,148,668), Luhya (6,823,842), Kalenjin (6,358,113), Luo (5,066,966), Kamba (4,663,910), Somali (2,780,502), Kisii (2,703,235), Mijikenda (2,488,691), Meru (1,975,869), Maasai (1,189,522), and Turkana (1,016,174). The North Eastern Province of Kenya, formerly known as NFD, is predominantly inhabited by the indigenous ethnic Somalis . Foreign-rooted populations include Arabs , Asians , and Europeans . [ 2 ] Languages Main article: Languages of Kenya Kenya's ethnic groups typically speak their mother tongues within their own communities. The two official languages , English and Swahili , are used in varying degrees of fluency for communication with other populations. English is widely spoken in commerce, schooling, and government. [ 214 ] Peri-urban and rural dwellers are less multilingual, with many in rural areas speaking only their native languages. [ 215 ] British English is primarily used in Kenya. Additionally, a distinct local dialect, Kenyan English , is used by some communities and individuals in the country, and contains features unique to it that were derived from local Bantu languages such as Kiswahili and Kikuyu . [ 216 ] It has been developing since colonisation and also contains certain elements of American English . Sheng is a Kiswahili-based cant spoken in some urban areas. Primarily a mixture of Swahili and English, it is an example of linguistic code-switching . [ 217 ] 69 languages are spoken in Kenya. Most belong to two broad language families: Niger-Congo ( Bantu branch ) and Nilo-Saharan ( Nilotic branch ), spoken by the country's Bantu and Nilotic populations respectively. The Cushitic and Arab ethnic minorities speak languages belonging to the separate Afroasiatic family, with the Indian and European residents speaking languages from the Indo-European family. [ 218 ] Urban centres Main article: List of cities and towns in Kenya by population Largest cities or towns in Kenya According to the 2019 Census [ 219 ] Rank Name County Pop. Rank Name County Pop. Nairobi Mombasa 1 Nairobi Nairobi 4 397 073 11 Ongata Rongai Kajiado 172 569 2 Mombasa Mombasa 1 208 333 12 Garissa Garissa 163 399 3 Nakuru Nakuru 570 674 13 Kitale Trans-Nzoia 162 174 4 Ruiru Kiambu 490 120 14 Juja Kiambu 156 041 5 Eldoret Uasin Gishu 475 716 15 Mlolongo Machakos 136 351 6 Kisumu Kisumu 397 957 16 Malindi Kilifi 119 859 7 Kikuyu Kiambu 323 881 17 Mandera Mandera 114 718 8 Thika Kiambu 251 407 18 Kisii Kisii 112 417 9 Naivasha Nakuru 198 444 19 Kakamega Kakamega 107 227 10 Karuri Kiambu 194 342 20 Ngong Kajiado 102 323 Religion Main article: Religion in Kenya Holy Ghost Roman Catholic Cathedral in Mombasa Most Kenyans are Christian (85.5%), with 33.4% Protestant , 20.6% Roman Catholic and 20.4% Evangelical . Roman Catholicism is the largest single Christian denomination in Kenya with about 10 million members. [ 2 ] The Presbyterian Church of East Africa has 3 million followers in Kenya and surrounding countries. [ 220 ] There are smaller conservative Reformed churches, the Africa Evangelical Presbyterian Church , [ 221 ] the Independent Presbyterian Church in Kenya , and the Reformed Church of East Africa . Orthodox Christianity has 621,200 adherents. [ 222 ] Kenya has by far the highest number of Quakers of any country in the world, with around 146,300. [ 223 ] The only Jewish synagogue in the country is in Nairobi. Islam is the second largest religion , comprising 11% of the population. [ 3 ] 60% of Kenyan Muslims live in the Coastal Region , comprising 50% of the total population there, while the upper part of Kenya's Eastern Region is home to 10% of the country's Muslims, where they are the majority religious group. [ 224 ] Indigenous beliefs are practised by 0.7% of the population, although many self-identifying Christians and Muslims maintain some traditional beliefs and customs . Nonreligious Kenyans are 1.6% of the population. [ 2 ] Some Hindus also live in Kenya. The numbers are estimated to be around 60,287, or 0.13% of the population. [ 2 ] Health Main article: Health in Kenya Outpatient Department of AIC Kapsowar Hospital [ 225 ] in Kapsowar Health care is one of the low-priority sectors in Kenya and was allocated 4.8% of the national budget in 2019/2020 or just 4.59% of GDP compared to high-priority sectors such as education which was allocated more than 25%. This is below the 4.98% average in Sub-Saharan Africa and 9.83% spent globally. According to the National and County Health Budget Analysis FY 2020/21, the breakdown of county health expenditure was 58% on Policy Planning and Administrative Support Services, 28% on Curative and Rehabilitative Health Services, 8% on Preventive and Promotive Health Services and 7% on Other Programmes. Health care is largely funded by private individuals and their families or employers through direct payments to health care providers , to the National Health Insurance Fund or to medical insurance companies. Additional funding comes from local, international and some government social safety net schemes. Public hospitals are fee-for-service establishments that generate large amounts of county and national government revenues making them highly political and corrupt enterprises. [ 226 ] Private health facilities are diverse, highly dynamic, and difficult to classify, unlike public health facilities, which are easily grouped in classes that consist of community-based (level I) services, run by community health workers ; dispensaries (level II facilities) run by nurses ; health centres (level III facilities), run by clinical officers ; sub-county hospitals (level IV facilities), which may be run by a clinical officer or a medical officer ; county hospitals (level V facilities), which may be run by a medical officer or a medical practitioner ; and national referral hospitals (level VI facilities), which are run by fully qualified medical practitioners . Table showing different grades of clinical officers, medical officers, and medical practitioners in Kenya's public service Nurses are by far the largest group of front-line health care providers in all sectors, followed by clinical officers, medical officers, and medical practitioners. These are absorbed and deployed into government service in accordance with the Scheme of Service for Nursing Personnel (2014), the Revised Scheme of Service for Clinical Personnel (2020) and the Revised Scheme of Service for Medical Officers and Dental Officers (2016). Traditional healers ( herbalists , witch doctors , and faith healers ) are readily available, trusted, and widely consulted as practitioners of first or last choice by both rural and urban dwellers. Despite major achievements in the health sector, Kenya still faces many challenges. The estimated life expectancy dropped in 2009 to approximately 55 years — five years below the 1990 level. [ 227 ] The infant mortality rate was high at approximately 44 deaths per 1,000 children in 2012. [ 228 ] The WHO estimated in 2011 that only 42% of births were attended by a skilled health professional. [ 229 ] Diseases of poverty directly correlate with a country's economic performance and wealth distribution : In 2015/16, 35.6% of Kenyans lived below the poverty line. [ 230 ] Preventable diseases like malaria, HIV/AIDS, pneumonia, diarrhoea, and malnutrition are the biggest burden, major child-killers, and responsible for much morbidity; weak policies, corruption, inadequate health workers, weak management, and poor leadership in the public health sector are largely to blame. According to 2009 estimates, HIV/AIDS prevalence is about 6.3% of the adult population. [ 231 ] However, the 2011 UNAIDS Report suggests that the HIV epidemic may be improving in Kenya, as HIV prevalence is declining among young people (ages 15–24) and pregnant women. [ 232 ] Kenya had an estimated 15 million cases of malaria in 2006. [ 233 ] Tuberculosis is a major public health problem. The per capita incidence of TB in Kenya more than quadrupled between 1990 and 2015. [ 234 ] The 2024 Global Hunger Index gave Kenya a 25.0 score, indicating that the severity of hunger is "serious". [ 235 ] Women Main articles: Women in Kenya , Child marriage in Kenya , and Polygamy in Kenya The total fertility rate in Kenya was estimated to be 4.49 children per woman in 2012. [ 236 ] According to a 2008–09 survey by the Kenyan government, the total fertility rate was 4.6% and the contraception usage rate among married women was 46%. [ 237 ] Maternal mortality is high, partly because of female genital mutilation , [ 166 ] with about 27% of women having undergone it. [ 238 ] This practice is however on the decline as the country becomes more modernised, and in 2011 it was banned in Kenya. [ 239 ] Women were economically empowered before colonialisation. By colonial land alienation, women lost access and control of land. [ 240 ] They became more economically dependent on men. [ 240 ] A colonial order of gender emerged where males dominated females. [ 240 ] Median age at first marriage increases with increasing education. [ 241 ] Rape, defilement, and battering are not always seen as serious crimes. [ 242 ] Reports of sexual assault are not always taken seriously. [ 242 ] Youth Article 260 of the Kenyan Constitution of 2010 defines youth as those between the ages of 18 and 34. [ 243 ] According to the 2019 Population and Census results, 75 percent of the 47.6 million population is under the age of 35, making Kenya a country of the youth . [ 244 ] Youth unemployment and underemployment in Kenya has become a problem. [ 245 ] According to the Kenya National Bureau of Statistics (KNBS), approximately 1.7 million people lost their jobs as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, which eliminated some informal jobs and caused the economy to slow. [ 245 ] The Kenyan government has made progress in addressing the high youth unemployment by implementing various affirmative action programs and projects which include: the National Youth Service , The National Youth Enterprise Development Fund, [ 246 ] The Women Enterprise Fund, [ 247 ] Kazi Mtaani, Ajira Digital , Kikao Mtaani, [ 248 ] Uwezo fund, [ 249 ] Future Bora [ 250 ] and Studio mashinani [ 251 ] that empower youth , offer job opportunities and to raise one's standard of living. Education Main article: Education in Kenya School children in a classroom An MSc student at Kenyatta University in Nairobi Children attend nursery school, or kindergarten in the private sector until they are five years old. This lasts one to three years (KG1, KG2 and KG3) and is financed privately because there has been no government policy on pre-schooling until recently. [ 252 ] Basic formal education starts at age six and lasts 12 years, consisting of eight years in primary school and four in high school or secondary. Primary school is free in public schools and those attending can join a vocational youth/village polytechnic, or make their own arrangements for an apprenticeship program and learn a trade such as tailoring, carpentry, motor vehicle repair, brick-laying and masonry for about two years. [ 253 ] Those who complete high school can join a polytechnic or other technical college and study for three years, or proceed directly to university and study for four years. Graduates from the polytechnics and colleges can then join the workforce and later obtain a specialised higher diploma qualification after a further one to two years of training, or join the university—usually in the second or third year of their respective course. The higher diploma is accepted by many employers in place of a bachelor's degree and direct or accelerated admission to post-graduate studies is possible in some universities. A Maasai girl at school Public universities in Kenya are highly commercialised institutions and only a small fraction of qualified high school graduates are admitted on limited government-sponsorship into programs of their choice. Most are admitted into the social sciences, which are cheap to run, or as self-sponsored students paying the full cost of their studies. Most qualified students who miss out opt for middle-level diploma programs in public or private universities, colleges, and polytechnics. In 2018, 18.5 percent of the Kenyan adult population was illiterate, which was the highest rate of literacy in East Africa. [ 254 ] [ 255 ] There are very wide regional disparities: for example, Nairobi had the highest level of literacy at 87.1 per cent, compared to North Eastern Province, the lowest, at 8.0 per cent. Preschool, which targets children from age three to five, is an integral component of the education system and is a key requirement for admission to Standard One (First Grade). At the end of primary education, pupils sit the Kenya Certificate of Primary Education (KCPE), which determines those who proceed to secondary school or vocational training. The result of this examination is needed for placement at secondary school. [ 253 ] Primary school is for students aged 6/7-13/14 years. For those who proceed to the secondary level, there is a national examination at the end of Form Four – the Kenya Certificate of Secondary Education (KCSE), which determines those proceeding to the universities, other professional training, or employment. Students sit examinations in eight subjects of their choosing. However, English, Kiswahili, and mathematics are compulsory subjects. The Kenya Universities and Colleges Central Placement Service (KUCCPS), formerly the Joint Admissions Board (JAB), is responsible for selecting students joining the public universities. Other than the public schools, there are many private schools, mainly in urban areas. Similarly, there are a number of international schools catering to various overseas educational systems. Kenya was ranked 96th in the Global Innovation Index in 2024. [ 256 ] Culture Main article: Culture of Kenya This section needs additional citations for verification . Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources in this section. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. Find sources: "Kenya" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( December 2020 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Kenyan boys and girls performing a traditional dance Nation Media House, which hosts the Nation Media Group The culture of Kenya comprises multiple traditions. Kenya has no single prominent culture. It instead consists of the various cultures of the country's different communities. Notable populations include the Swahili on the coast, several other Bantu communities in the central and western regions, and Nilotic communities in the northwest. The Maasai culture is well known to tourism, despite constituting a relatively small part of Kenya's population. They are renowned for their elaborate upper-body adornment and jewellery. Kenya has an extensive music, television, and theatre scene. Literature Main article: Kenyan literature Kenyan author Ngũgĩ wa Thiong'o Ngũgĩ wa Thiong'o is one of Kenya's best-known writers. His novel Weep Not, Child depicts life in Kenya during the British occupation. The story details the effects of the Mau Mau on the lives of Kenyans. Its combination of themes— colonialism , education, and love—helped make it one of the best-known African novels. M.G. Vassanji 's 2003 novel The In-Between World of Vikram Lall won the Giller Prize in 2003. It is the fictional memoir of a Kenyan of Indian heritage and his family as they adjust to the changing political climates in colonial and post-colonial Kenya. Since 2003, the literary journal Kwani? has been publishing Kenyan contemporary literature. Kenya has also nurtured emerging versatile authors such as Paul Kipchumba (Kipwendui, Kibiwott) who demonstrate a pan-African outlook. [ 257 ] Music Main article: Music of Kenya Popular Kenyan musician Jua Cali Kenya has a diverse assortment of popular music forms, in addition to multiple types of folk music based on the variety of over 40 regional languages. [ 258 ] Drums are the most dominant instrument in popular Kenyan music. Drum beats are very complex and include both native rhythms and imported ones, especially the Congolese cavacha rhythm. Popular Kenyan music usually involves the interplay of multiple parts, and more recently, showy guitar solos as well. There are also a number of local hip-hop artists, including Jua Cali ; Afro-pop bands such as Sauti Sol ; and musicians who play local genres like Benga, such as Akothee . Lyrics are most often in Kiswahili or English. There is also some emerging aspect of Lingala borrowed from Congolese musicians. Lyrics are also written in local languages. Urban radio generally only plays English music, though there also exist a number of vernacular radio stations. Zilizopendwa is a genre of local urban music that was recorded in the 1960s, 70s, and 80s by musicians such as Daudi Kabaka , Fadhili William , and Sukuma Bin Ongaro, and is particularly enjoyed by older people—having been popularised by the Kenya Broadcasting Corporation's Kiswahili service (formerly called Voice of Kenya or VOK). The Isukuti is a vigorous dance performed by the Luhya sub-tribes to the beat of a traditional drum called the Isukuti during many occasions such as the birth of a child, marriage, or funeral. Other traditional dances include the Ohangla among the Luo , Nzele among the Mijikenda , Mugithi among the Kikuyu , and Taarab among the Swahili . Kenya has a growing Christian gospel music scene. Prominent local gospel musicians include the Kenyan Boys Choir . Benga music has been popular since the late 1960s, especially in the area around Lake Victoria . The word benga is occasionally used to refer to any kind of pop music. Bass, guitar, and percussion are the usual instruments. Sports Main article: Sport in Kenya Jepkosgei Kipyego and Jepkemoi Cheruiyot at the 2012 London Olympics Kenya is active in several sports, among them cricket , rallying , football , rugby , field hockey , and boxing . The country is known chiefly for its dominance in middle-distance and long-distance athletics, having consistently produced Olympic and Commonwealth Games champions in various distance events, especially in 800 m, 1,500 m, 3,000 m steeplechase, 5,000 m, 10,000 m, and the marathon. Kenyan athletes (particularly Kalenjin ), continue to dominate the world of distance running, although competition from Morocco and Ethiopia has reduced this supremacy. Some of Kenya's best-known athletes include the four-time women's Boston Marathon winner and two-time world champion Catherine Ndereba , 800m world record holder David Rudisha , former marathon world record-holder Paul Tergat , and 5000m Olympic gold medalist John Ngugi . Kenya's most decorated athlete is three-time Olympic gold medalist and eleven-time world marathon major champion, Eliud Kipchoge . Kenya won several medals during the Beijing Olympics: six gold, four silver, and four bronze, making it Africa's most successful nation in the 2008 Olympics. New athletes gained attention, such as Pamela Jelimo , the women's 800m gold medalist who went on to win the IAAF Golden League jackpot, and Samuel Wanjiru , who won the men's marathon. Retired Olympic and Commonwealth Games champion Kipchoge Keino helped usher in Kenya's ongoing distance dynasty in the 1970s and was followed by Commonwealth Champion Henry Rono 's spectacular string of world record performances. Lately, there has been controversy in Kenyan athletics circles, with the defection of a number of Kenyan athletes to represent other countries, chiefly Bahrain and Qatar . [ 259 ] The Kenyan Ministry of Sports has tried to stop the defections, but they have continued anyway, with Bernard Lagat being the latest, choosing to represent the United States. [ 259 ] Most of these defections occur because of economic or financial factors. [ 260 ] Decisions by the Kenyan government to tax athletes' earnings may also be a motivating factor. [ 261 ] Some elite Kenyan runners who cannot qualify for their country's strong national team find it easier to qualify by running for other countries. [ 262 ] Kenyan Olympic and world record holder in the 800 metres, David Rudisha Kenya has been a dominant force in women's volleyball within Africa, with both the clubs and the national team winning various continental championships in the past decade. [ 263 ] [ 264 ] The women's team has competed at the Olympics and World Championships , though without any notable success. Cricket is another popular sport, also ranking as the most successful team sport. Kenya has competed in the Cricket World Cup since 1996 . They upset some of the world's best teams and reached the semi-finals of the 2003 tournament . They won the inaugural World Cricket League Division 1 hosted in Nairobi and participated in the World T20. They also participated in the ICC Cricket World Cup 2011 . Their current captain is Rakep Patel . [ 265 ] Rugby is increasing in popularity, especially with the annual Safari Sevens tournament. The Kenya Sevens team ranked 9th in the IRB Sevens World Series for the 2006 season. In 2016, the team beat Fiji at the Singapore Sevens finals, making Kenya the second African nation after South Africa to win a World Series championship. [ 266 ] [ 267 ] [ 268 ] Kenya was once also a regional powerhouse in football. However, its dominance has been eroded by wrangles within the now defunct Kenya Football Federation , [ 269 ] leading to a suspension by FIFA which was lifted in March 2007. [ citation needed ] In the motor rallying arena, Kenya is home to the world-famous Safari Rally , commonly acknowledged as one of the toughest rallies in the world. [ 270 ] First held in 1953, it was a part of the World Rally Championship for many years until its exclusion after the 2002 event owing to financial difficulties. Some of the best rally drivers in the world have taken part in and won the rally, such as Björn Waldegård , Hannu Mikkola , Tommi Mäkinen , Shekhar Mehta , Carlos Sainz , and Colin McRae . The Safari Rally returned to the world championship in 2021 , after the 2003–2019 events ran as part of the African Rally Championship . [ citation needed ] Nairobi has hosted several major continental sports events, including the FIBA Africa Championship 1993 , where Kenya's national basketball team finished in the top four, its best performance to date. [ 271 ] Kenya also has its own ice hockey team, the Kenya Ice Lions. [ 272 ] The team's home ground is the Solar Ice Rink at the Panari Sky Centre in Nairobi, [ 273 ] [ 274 ] which is the first and largest ice rink in all of Africa. [ 275 ] Kenya men's national field hockey team was considered one of the good teams in the world during 1960s and 1970s. Roshan Ali, former goalkeeper of Kenya field hockey team Kenya took 6th position in 1964 Summer Olympics hockey tournament and 4th in 1971 Men's FIH Hockey World Cup . Cuisine Ugali and sukuma wiki , staples of Kenyan cuisine Kenyans generally have three meals in a day—breakfast ( kiamsha kinywa ), lunch ( chakula cha mchana ), and supper ( chakula cha jioni or simply chajio ). In between, they have the 10-o'clock tea ( chai ya saa nne ) and 4 p.m. tea ( chai ya saa kumi ). Breakfast is usually tea or porridge with bread, chapati , mahamri , boiled sweet potatoes, or yams . Githeri is a common lunchtime dish in many households, while Ugali with vegetables, sour milk ( mursik ), meat, fish, or any other stew is generally eaten by much of the population for lunch or supper. Regional variations and dishes also exist. In western Kenya, among the Luo , fish is a common dish; among the Kalenjin , who dominate much of the Rift Valley Region, mursik—sour milk—is a common drink. In cities such as Nairobi, there are fast-food restaurants, including Steers , KFC , [ 276 ] and Subway . [ 277 ] There are also many fish-and-chips shops. [ 278 ] Cheese is becoming more popular in Kenya, with consumption increasing particularly among the middle class. [ 279 ] [ 280 ] See also Foreign relations of Kenya Index of Kenya-related articles List of counties of Kenya by GDP List of counties of Kenya by area List of Kenyans Outline of Kenya Water supply and sanitation in Kenya Notes ^ / ˈ k ɛ n j ə / [ 12 ] ^ Swahili : Jamhuri ya Kenya References ^ a b Constitution (2009) Art. 7 [National, official and other languages] "(1) The national language of the Republic is Swahili. (2) The official languages of the Republic are Swahili and English. (3) The State shall–-–- (a) promote and protect the diversity of language of the people of Kenya; and (b) promote the development and use of indigenous languages, Kenyan Sign language, Braille and other communication formats and technologies accessible to persons with disabilities." ^ a b c d e f "2019 Kenya Population and Housing Census Volume IV: Distribution of Population by Socio-Economic Characteristics" . Kenya National Bureau of Statistics . Archived from the original on 5 June 2020 . Retrieved 24 March 2020 . ^ a b "2022 Report on International Religious Freedom: Kenya" . United States Department of State. Archived from the original on 31 October 2023 . Retrieved 24 December 2023 . ^ "Demographic Yearbook – Table 3: Population by sex, rate of population increase, surface area and density" (PDF) . United Nations Statistics Division. 2012. Archived (PDF) from the original on 26 August 2020 . Retrieved 4 September 2017 . ^ "United Nations Statistics Division – Demographic and Social Statistics" . unstats.un.org . Archived from the original on 28 April 2015 . Retrieved 4 September 2017 . ^ "The Kenya National Bureau of Statistics" . The Kenya National Bureau of Statistics . Retrieved 23 June 2024 . ^ a b c "2019 Kenya Population and Housing Census Results" . Kenya National Bureau of Statistics . 4 November 2019. Archived from the original on 13 November 2019 . Retrieved 15 November 2019 . ^ a b c d "World Economic Outlook Database, October 2023 Edition. (Kenya)" . IMF.org . International Monetary Fund . 22 April 2025. Archived from the original on 21 October 2023 . Retrieved 22 April 2025 . ^ "Gini index" . World Bank Group. 2019. Archived from the original on 15 June 2023 . Retrieved 17 October 2023 . ^ "Human Development Report 2025" (PDF) . United Nations Development Programme . 6 May 2025. Archived (PDF) from the original on 6 May 2025 . Retrieved 6 May 2025 . ^ a b c d Central Intelligence Agency (2012). "Kenya" . The World Factbook . Archived from the original on 24 January 2021 . Retrieved 28 May 2013 . ^ "Kenya" . Collins English Dictionary . HarperCollins . ^ "Kenya National Bureau of Statistics - Kenya's Top Data Site" . 23 December 2021 . Retrieved 11 January 2025 . ^ "African Hunter-Gatherers: Survival, History and Politics of Identity" (PDF) . repository.kulib.kyoto-u.ac.jp . Archived (PDF) from the original on 4 November 2018 . Retrieved 18 October 2021 . ^ "The East African Bushmen" . researchgate.net . Archived from the original on 9 January 2022 . Retrieved 18 October 2021 . ^ a b Ehret, C. (1983) Culture History in the Southern Sudan , J. Mack, P. Robertshaw, Eds., British Institute in Eastern Africa, Nairobi, pp. 19–48, ISBN 1-872566-04-9 . ^ "Wonders Of The African World" . pbs . Archived from the original on 19 October 2019 . Retrieved 18 October 2021 . ^ "Mombasa | History, Map, Location, Population, & Facts | Britannica" . www.britannica.com . 10 January 2025 . Retrieved 11 January 2025 . ^ "Victorian Electronic Democracy – Final Report – Table of ContentsVictorian Electronic Democracy – Final Report – Glossary" . 13 December 2007. Archived from the original on 13 December 2007 . Retrieved 29 January 2019 . ^ Robinson, Rebecca (27 April 2025). "One of Africa's 'richest' countries set to be overtaken by neighbour - £12bn more" . Express . Retrieved 29 April 2025 . ^ "GNI per capita, Atlas method (current US$) – Kenya" . worldbank.org . World Bank . Retrieved 29 April 2025 . ^ "East African Community" (PDF) . eala.org . Archived (PDF) from the original on 24 December 2023 . Retrieved 19 December 2023 . ^ "East African Federation" . eac.int . Archived from the original on 15 December 2023 . Retrieved 19 December 2023 . ^ Maxwell, Daniel, and Ben Watkins. "Humanitarian information systems and emergencies in the Greater Horn of Africa: logical components and logical linkages." Disasters 27.1 (2003): 72–90. ^ Mwangi S. Kimenyi; Francis M. Mwega; Njuguna S. Ndung'u (May 2016). "The African Lions: Kenya country case study" (PDF) . The Brookings Institution. Archived (PDF) from the original on 27 May 2016 . Retrieved 23 May 2016 . ^ a b Sullivan, Paul (2006). Kikuyu Districts . Dar es Salaam, Tanzania: Mkuki na Nyota Publishers. ^ "History" . Archived from the original on 26 May 2016 . Retrieved 13 May 2016 . ^ Krapf, Johann Ludwig (1860). Travels, Researches, and Missionary Labours in Eastern Africa . London: Frank Cass & Co. Ltd. ^ Krapf, Johann Ludwig (13 May 1850). "Extract from Krapf's diary". Church Missionary Intelligencer . i : 452. ^ Foottit, Claire (2006) [2004]. Kenya . The Brade Travel Guide. Bradt Travel Guides Ltd. ISBN 978-1-84162-066-4 . ^ Ratcliffe, B. J. (January 1943). "The Spelling of Kenya". Journal of the Royal African Society . 42 (166): 42– 44. JSTOR 717465 . ^ Glynn Llywelyn Isaac, Barbara Isaac (1977). Olorgesailie: archeological studies of a Middle Pleistocene lake basin in Kenya . University of Chicago Press. p. xiii. ISBN 978-0-226-38483-2 . Archived from the original on 15 April 2023 . Retrieved 26 March 2023 . ^ Chatterjee, Rhitu (15 March 2018). "Scientists Are Amazed By Stone Age Tools They Dug Up In Kenya" . NPR . Archived from the original on 15 March 2018 . Retrieved 15 March 2018 . ^ Yong, Ed (15 March 2018). "A Cultural Leap at the Dawn of Humanity – New finds from Kenya suggest that humans used long-distance trade networks, sophisticated tools, and symbolic pigments right from the dawn of our species" . The Atlantic . Archived from the original on 17 November 2020 . Retrieved 15 March 2018 . ^ Brooks AS, Yellen JE, Potts R, Behrensmeyer AK, Deino AL, Leslie DE, Ambrose SH, Ferguson JR, d'Errico F, Zipkin AM, Whittaker S, Post J, Veatch EG, Foecke K, Clark JB (2018). "Long-distance stone transport and pigment use in the earliest Middle Stone Age" . Science . 360 (6384): 90– 94. Bibcode : 2018Sci...360...90B . doi : 10.1126/science.aao2646 . ISSN 0036-8075 . PMID 29545508 . ^ a b Ehret, C. (2002) The Civilizations of Africa: a History to 1800 , University Press of Virginia, ISBN 0-8139-2085-X . ^ Ehret, C. (1980) The historical reconstruction of Southern Cushitic phonology and vocabulary , Kölner Beiträge zur Afrikanistik 5, Bd., Reimer, Berlin. ^ Ambrose, S.H. (1982). "Archaeological and linguistic reconstructions of history in East Africa." In Ehert, C., and Posnansky, M. (eds.), The archaeological and linguistic reconstruction of African history , University of California Press, ISBN 0-520-04593-9 . ^ Ambrose, S.H. (1986) Sprache und Geschichte in Afrika 7.2, 11. ^ Traditional occupations of indigenous and tribal peoples: Emerging trends . International Labour Organization. 2000. ISBN 9789221122586 . ^ Ehret, C. (1998) An African Classical Age : Eastern and Southern Africa in World History, 1000 B.C. to A.D. 400. , University Press of Virginia, Charlottesville, pp. xvii, 354, ISBN 0-8139-2057-4 . ^ a b Smith, C. Wayne (1995) Crop Production: Evolution, History, and Technology , John Wiley & Sons, p. 132, ISBN 0-471-07972-3 . ^ a b "Wonders of the African World" . PBS . Archived from the original on 1 March 2020 . Retrieved 16 April 2010 . ^ Brielle, E. S.; Fleisher, J.; Wynne-Jones, S.; et al. (2023). "Entwined African and Asian genetic roots of mediaeval peoples of the Swahili coast" . Nature . 615 (7954): 866– 873. Bibcode : 2023Natur.615..866B . doi : 10.1038/s41586-023-05754-w . PMC 10060156 . PMID 36991187 . ^ "History and Origin of Swahili – Jifunze Kiswahili" . swahilihub.com. Archived from the original on 21 June 2016 . Retrieved 17 July 2016 . ^ Nanjira, Daniel Don (2010). African Foreign Policy and Diplomacy from Antiquity to the 21st Century . ABC-CLIO. ISBN 9780313379826 . Archived from the original on 15 April 2023 . Retrieved 26 March 2023 . ^ Spear, Thomas (2000). "Early Swahili History Reconsidered". The International Journal of African Historical Studies . 33 (2): 257– 290. doi : 10.2307/220649 . JSTOR 220649 . ^ شاكر مصطفى, موسوعة دوال العالم الأسلامي ورجالها الجزء الثالث , (دار العلم للملايين: 1993), p. 1360 ^ Nicolini, Beatrice (1 January 2004). Makran, Oman, and Zanzibar: Three-Terminal Cultural Corridor in the Western Indian Ocean, 1799–1856 . BRILL. p. 62. ISBN 9789004137806 . Archived from the original on 18 May 2024 . Retrieved 26 March 2023 . ^ Gower, R.H. (April 1952). "Swahili Borrowings from English" . Africa . 22 (2): 154– 157. doi : 10.2307/1156242 . JSTOR 1156242 . S2CID 146513246 . Archived from the original on 13 August 2022 . Retrieved 13 August 2022 . ^ Alsayyad, Nezar (30 March 2001). Hybrid Urbanism . Greenwood Publishing Group. ISBN 978-0-275-96612-6 . Archived from the original on 18 May 2024 . Retrieved 26 March 2023 . ^ Ali, Shanti Sadiq (1996). The African Dispersal in the Deccan . Orient Blackswan. ISBN 978-81-250-0485-1 . [ permanent dead link ] ^ "PBS website" . PBS . 16 January 2001. Archived from the original on 8 October 2015 . Retrieved 12 October 2015 . ^ " Slavery (sociology) Archived 2 June 2015 at the Wayback Machine ". Encyclopædia Britannica Online. ^ Swahili Coast Archived 19 January 2018 at the Wayback Machine . National Geographic . ^ Ndeda, Mildred (2019). "Population movement, settlement and the construction of society to the east of Lake Victoria in precolonial times: the western Kenyan case" . The East African Review (52): 83– 108. doi : 10.4000/eastafrica.473 . S2CID 198396394 . Archived from the original on 13 August 2022 . Retrieved 13 August 2022 . ^ Beachey, R.W. (1967). "The East African Ivory Trade in the Nineteenth Century". The Journal of African History . 8 (2): 269– 290. doi : 10.1017/S0021853700007052 . S2CID 162882930 . ^ "Johannes Rebmann" . Encyclopædia Britannica (Online ed.). Archived from the original on 13 August 2022 . Retrieved 15 August 2022 . ^ a b c Encyclopædia Britannica ^ a b c d e R. Mugo Gatheru (2005) Kenya: From Colonization to Independence, 1888–1970 , McFarland, ISBN 0-7864-2199-1 ^ "Ismaili muslim" . Magicalkenya.com. Archived from the original on 3 January 2009 . Retrieved 16 April 2010 . ^ "We Want Our Country" . Time . 5 November 1965 ^ Firestone, Matthew (15 September 2010). Kenya . Lonely Planet Publications. p. 28. ISBN 9781742203553 . Archived from the original on 18 May 2024 . Retrieved 26 March 2023 . ^ a b Maloba, Wunyabari O. (1993) Mau Mau and Kenya: An Analysis of Peasant Revolt , Indiana University Press, 0852557450. ^ "Uncovering the brutal truth about the British empire" . The Guardian . 18 August 2016. Archived from the original on 1 June 2019 . Retrieved 22 November 2019 . ^ "Mau Mau" . Encyclopædia Britannica (Online ed.). Archived from the original on 13 August 2022 . Retrieved 15 August 2022 . ^ Anderson, David (2005). Histories of the Hanged: The Dirty War in Kenya and the End of Empire . London: Weidenfeld and Nicolson. ISBN 0-393-05986-3 . Archived from the original on 18 May 2024 . Retrieved 13 August 2022 . ^ Castagno, A. A. (1964). "The Somali-Kenyan Controversy: Implications for the Future". The Journal of Modern African Studies . 2 (2): 165– 188. doi : 10.1017/S0022278X00003980 . JSTOR 158817 . S2CID 154443409 . ^ "NORTHERN FRONTIER DISTRICT OF KENYA (Hansard, 3 April 1963)" . api.parliament.uk . Archived from the original on 15 October 2019 . Retrieved 31 December 2019 . ^ "Kenya, 1962: Enumeration Forms in English" (PDF) . Archived (PDF) from the original on 4 February 2019 . Retrieved 24 May 2020 . ^ a b "Commonwealth and Colonial Law" by Kenneth Roberts-Wray , London, Stevens, 1966. P. 762 ^ HC Deb 22 November 1963 vol 684 cc1329-400 wherein the UK Under-Secretary of State for Commonwealth Relations and for the Colonies stated: "An agreement was then signed on the 8th October 1963, providing that on the date when Kenya became independent the territories comprising the Kenya Coastal Strip would become part of Kenya proper." ^ Bruce Baker, Escape from Domination in Africa: Political Disengagement & Its Consequences , (Africa World Press: 2003), p.83 ^ Hogg, Richard (1986). "The New Pastoralism: Poverty and Dependency in Northern Kenya". Africa: Journal of the International African Institute . 56 (3): 319– 333. doi : 10.2307/1160687 . JSTOR 1160687 . S2CID 146312775 . ^ Howell, John (May 1968). "An Analysis of Kenyan Foreign Policy". The Journal of Modern African Studies . 6 (1): 29– 48. doi : 10.1017/S0022278X00016657 . JSTOR 158675 . S2CID 154605094 . ^ "Foreign Relations of the United States, 1969–1976, Volume E–6, Documents on Africa, 1973–1976 - Office of the Historian" . history.state.gov . Archived from the original on 26 March 2023 . Retrieved 26 March 2023 . ^ Kabukuru, Wanjohi (26 February 2015). "The Kenya-Ethiopia Defence Pact: Is Somalia a pawn?" . New African Magazine . Archived from the original on 26 March 2023 . Retrieved 26 March 2023 . ^ Permanent Mission of the Republic of Kenya to the United Nations (2002). "Kenya at the United Nations" . Consulate General of Kenya in New York. Archived from the original on 8 June 2009 . Retrieved 15 February 2010 . ^ Boone, Catherine (April 2012). "Land Conflict and Distributive Politics in Kenya" (PDF) . African Studies Review . 55 (1): 75– 103. doi : 10.1353/arw.2012.0010 . hdl : 2152/19778 . ISSN 0002-0206 . S2CID 154334560 . ^ Times, Charles Mohr Special to The New York (16 December 1973). "Kenya, 10 Years Independent, Emerges as a Model of Stability (Published 1973)" . The New York Times . Archived from the original on 27 November 2020 . Retrieved 19 November 2020 . ^ a b "Letters to the Editor (Published 1974)" . The New York Times . 16 January 1974. Archived from the original on 30 November 2020 . Retrieved 19 November 2020 . ^ "Amnesty International Annual Report 1973-1974. Available from" (PDF) . January 1974. Archived (PDF) from the original on 21 January 2021 . Retrieved 19 November 2020 . ^ Ndegwa, Stephen N. (1999). "Multi-Party Politics in Kenya: the Kenyatta and Moi States and the Triumph of the System in the 1992 Election (review)". Africa Today . 46 (2): 146– 148. doi : 10.1353/at.1999.0008 . ISSN 1527-1978 . S2CID 145810474 . ^ Society . Nyamora Communications Limited. 1992. p. 12. Archived from the original on 6 May 2023 . Retrieved 26 March 2023 . ^ "Wagalla massacre: Raila Odinga orders Kenya probe" . BBC. 11 February 2011. Archived from the original on 22 June 2014 . Retrieved 14 November 2013 . ^ Harden, Blaine (25 February 1988) Many Voters Stay Home as Kenya Drops Secret Ballot in Parliamentary Election , The Washington Post . ^ Moreno, Pedro C. (ed.). "Kenya" . Handbook on Religious Liberty Around the World . Charlottesville, VA: The Rutherford Institute. Archived from the original on 29 June 2010. ^ a b c Keith., Kyle (1999). Politics of the independence of Kenya . Macmillan. ISBN 978-0333720080 . OCLC 795968156 . ^ Goldsworthy, David (March 1982). "Ethnicity and Leadership in Africa: the 'Untypical' Case of Tom Mboya". The Journal of Modern African Studies . 20 (1): 107– 126. doi : 10.1017/s0022278x00000082 . ISSN 0022-278X . S2CID 154841201 . ^ a b "KENYA: parliamentary elections National Assembly, 1992" . archive.ipu.org . Archived from the original on 17 August 2018 . Retrieved 29 January 2019 . ^ "Clashes, elections and land – church keeps watch in Molo" . IRIN . 19 July 2007. Archived from the original on 17 December 2017 . Retrieved 29 January 2019 . ^ a b c "Kenya profile" . 31 January 2018. Archived from the original on 30 January 2019 . Retrieved 29 January 2019 . ^ "Kenya History Timeline – historic overview of Kenya, Africa" . Crawfurd Homepage . Archived from the original on 23 December 2018 . Retrieved 29 January 2019 . ^ a b Anderson, David M. (2003). "Kenya's Elections 2002 – The Dawning of a New Era?". African Affairs . 102 (407): 331– 342. doi : 10.1093/afraf/adg007 . ^ AfricaNews (25 October 2017). "A look at Kenya's elections history since independence in 1964" . Africanews . Archived from the original on 30 January 2019 . Retrieved 29 January 2019 . ^ "Of Oranges and Bananas: The 2005 Kenya Referendum on the Constitution" . CMI – Chr. Michelsen Institute . Archived from the original on 12 May 2016 . Retrieved 13 May 2016 . ^ "Deal to end Kenyan crisis agreed" . 12 April 2008. Archived from the original on 15 April 2008 . Retrieved 29 January 2019 . ^ "FACTBOX-East African common market begins" . Reuters . 1 July 2010. Archived from the original on 8 July 2010 . Retrieved 29 January 2019 . ^ "The Standard | Online Edition :: Somalia government supports Kenyan forces' mission" . 14 March 2012. Archived from the original on 14 March 2012 . Retrieved 29 January 2019 . ^ Koech, Dennis (25 July 2011). "Red Cross warns of catastrophe in Turkana" . Kbc.co.ke. Archived from the original on 4 January 2012 . Retrieved 7 August 2011 . ^ "Kenya: schools close as famine takes hold in Turkana" . Indcatholicnews.com. 28 July 2011. Archived from the original on 19 October 2011 . Retrieved 7 August 2011 . ^ Gettleman, Jeffrey (3 February 2012) U.N. Says Famine in Somalia Is Over, but Risks Remain Archived 7 November 2016 at the Wayback Machine . The New York Times . ^ "Supreme Court upholds Uhuru's election as president" . Daily Nation . Archived from the original on 30 January 2019 . Retrieved 29 January 2019 . ^ Burke, Jason (25 October 2017). "Kenya election rerun to go ahead after court fails to rule on delay" . The Guardian . ISSN 0261-3077 . Archived from the original on 28 January 2019 . Retrieved 29 January 2019 . ^ "Kenya court decision demonstrates respect for rule of law | IDLO" . idlo.int . September 2017. Archived from the original on 30 January 2019 . Retrieved 29 January 2019 . ^ Team, Standard. "President Uhuru Kenyatta declared winner of repeat presidential election" . The Standard . Archived from the original on 30 January 2019 . Retrieved 29 January 2019 . ^ Moore, Jina (30 October 2017). "President Uhuru Kenyatta declared winner of repeat presidential election" . The New York Times . Archived from the original on 25 July 2018 . Retrieved 29 January 2019 . ^ Wilson, Tom (1 November 2019). "Handshake ends crisis and leads to signs of progress in Kenya" . Financial Times . Archived from the original on 14 May 2021 . Retrieved 27 June 2021 . ^ "The Handshake that Shaped a Nation" . Kenya Connection . 31 May 2018. Archived from the original on 23 April 2021 . Retrieved 21 June 2021 . ^ a b c d e Omondi, Ferdinand: "Kenya's BBI blocked in scathing court verdict for President Kenyatta," Archived 14 May 2021 at the Wayback Machine 14 May 2021, BBC News (Africa), retrieved 14 May 2021 ^ a b c d e Miriri, Duncan: "Kenyan court slams brakes on president's constitutional changes," Archived 14 May 2021 at the Wayback Machine 13 May 2021, Reuters News Service , retrieved 14 May 2021 ^ "Kenyan court rejects disputed bid to change constitution" . Aljazeera . 20 August 2021. Archived from the original on 26 August 2021 . Retrieved 27 August 2021 . ^ "Kenya election result: William Ruto wins presidential poll" . BBC News . 15 August 2022. Archived from the original on 15 August 2022 . Retrieved 19 August 2022 . ^ Obulutsa, George; Mersie, Ayenat (13 September 2022). "William Ruto sworn in as Kenya's fifth president" . Reuters . Archived from the original on 5 October 2022 . Retrieved 13 September 2022 . ^ "Protests in Nairobi over Kenya government's tax hikes BBC News" . ^ Murayama, Yuji; Kamusoko, Courage; Yamashita, Akio; Estoque, Ronald C. (29 March 2017). Urban Development in Asia and Africa: Geospatial Analysis of Metropolises . Springer. ISBN 978-981-10-3241-7 . Archived from the original on 6 May 2023 . Retrieved 27 March 2023 . ^ Stokes, Jamie (2009). Encyclopedia of the Peoples of Africa and the Middle East . Infobase Publishing. ISBN 978-1-4381-2676-0 . Archived from the original on 15 April 2023 . Retrieved 27 March 2023 . ^ a b CIA (2010). The World Factbook . Potomac Books, Inc. p. 336. ISBN 978-1-59797-541-4 . ^ Salih, Mohamed (2012). Local Climate Change and Society . Routledge. p. 119. ISBN 9780415627153 . ^ Peck, Dannele E.; Peterson, Jeffrey M. (2015). Climate Variability and Water Dependent Sectors: Impacts and Potential Adaptations . Routledge. ISBN 978-1-317-61427-2 . ^ "Kenya climate: average weather, temperature, precipitation, best time" . climatestotravel.com . Archived from the original on 2 August 2020 . Retrieved 15 January 2020 . ^ Hausfather, Zeke; Peters, Glen (29 January 2020). "Emissions – the 'business as usual' story is misleading" . Nature . 577 (7792): 618– 20. Bibcode : 2020Natur.577..618H . doi : 10.1038/d41586-020-00177-3 . PMID 31996825 . ^ Schuur, Edward A.G.; Abbott, Benjamin W.; Commane, Roisin; Ernakovich, Jessica; Euskirchen, Eugenie; Hugelius, Gustaf; Grosse, Guido; Jones, Miriam; Koven, Charlie; Leshyk, Victor; Lawrence, David; Loranty, Michael M.; Mauritz, Marguerite; Olefeldt, David; Natali, Susan; Rodenhizer, Heidi; Salmon, Verity; Schädel, Christina; Strauss, Jens; Treat, Claire; Turetsky, Merritt (2022). "Permafrost and Climate Change: Carbon Cycle Feedbacks From the Warming Arctic" . Annual Review of Environment and Resources . 47 : 343– 371. doi : 10.1146/annurev-environ-012220-011847 . Medium-range estimates of Arctic carbon emissions could result from moderate climate emission mitigation policies that keep global warming below 3°C (e.g., RCP4.5). This global warming level most closely matches country emissions reduction pledges made for the Paris Climate Agreement... ^ Phiddian, Ellen (5 April 2022). "Explainer: IPCC Scenarios" . Cosmos . Archived from the original on 20 September 2023 . Retrieved 30 September 2023 . "The IPCC doesn't make projections about which of these scenarios is more likely, but other researchers and modellers can. The Australian Academy of Science , for instance, released a report last year stating that our current emissions trajectory had us headed for a 3°C warmer world, roughly in line with the middle scenario. Climate Action Tracker predicts 2.5 to 2.9°C of warming based on current policies and action, with pledges and government agreements taking this to 2.1°C. ^ a b c "Climate Change Profile: Kenya – Kenya" . ReliefWeb . Retrieved 24 November 2020 . ^ "Agricultural Sector Transformation and Growth Strategy" (PDF) . Ministry of Agriculture Livestock and Fisheries . 2019. p. 20. Archived from the original (PDF) on 10 December 2020 . Retrieved 8 December 2020 . ^ Climate Change in Kenya focus on Children (PDF) (Report). UNICEF. ^ Salih, Abubakr A. M.; Baraibar, Marta; Mwangi, Kenneth Kemucie; Artan, Guleid (July 2020). "Climate change and locust outbreak in East Africa" . Nature Climate Change . 10 (7): 584– 585. Bibcode : 2020NatCC..10..584S . doi : 10.1038/s41558-020-0835-8 . ISSN 1758-678X . S2CID 220290864 . ^ "Wildebeest Migration" . National Geographic Society . 19 January 2012. Archived from the original on 12 June 2016 . Retrieved 13 May 2016 . ^ Bashir, Hanif (27 May 2015). "Masai Mara Safari – The Migration | Tour Packages" . Kenya Travel Tips . Archived from the original on 2 March 2021 . Retrieved 3 March 2021 . ^ Pflanz, Mike (13 June 2010). "New road threatens Africa's 'wonder of the world' wildebeest migration" . Daily Telegraph . ISSN 0307-1235 . Archived from the original on 15 January 2020 . Retrieved 15 January 2020 . ^ Grantham, H. S.; Duncan, A.; Evans, T. D.; Jones, K. R.; Beyer, H. L.; Schuster, R.; Walston, J.; Ray, J. C.; Robinson, J. G.; Callow, M.; Clements, T.; Costa, H. M.; DeGemmis, A.; Elsen, P. R.; Ervin, J.; Franco, P.; Goldman, E.; Goetz, S.; Hansen, A.; Hofsvang, E.; Jantz, P.; Jupiter, S.; Kang, A.; Langhammer, P.; Laurance, W. F.; Lieberman, S.; Linkie, M.; Malhi, Y.; Maxwell, S.; Mendez, M.; Mittermeier, R.; Murray, N. J.; Possingham, H.; Radachowsky, J.; Saatchi, S.; Samper, C.; Silverman, J.; Shapiro, A.; Strassburg, B.; Stevens, T.; Stokes, E.; Taylor, R.; Tear, T.; Tizard, R.; Venter, O.; Visconti, P.; Wang, S.; Watson, J. E. M. (2020). "Anthropogenic modification of forests means only 40% of remaining forests have high ecosystem integrity – Supplementary Material" . Nature Communications . 11 (1): 5978. Bibcode : 2020NatCo..11.5978G . doi : 10.1038/s41467-020-19493-3 . ISSN 2041-1723 . PMC 7723057 . PMID 33293507 . ^ Novak, Andrew. "The Criminal Justice System and Eroding Democracy After Independence – Page 12" . racism.org . Archived from the original on 3 June 2016 . Retrieved 13 May 2016 . ^ "Corruption Perceptions Index 2019" . transparency.org . Transparency International . 24 January 2020. Archived from the original on 12 May 2020 . Retrieved 20 February 2020 . ^ "Business Corruption in Kenya" . Business Anti-Corruption Portal. Archived from the original on 6 April 2014 . Retrieved 4 April 2014 . ^ A short history of the 2010 Kenya constitution Archived 30 October 2012 at the Wayback Machine . kenyaconstitution.org ^ "International observers declare Kenyan elections fair" . cbc.ca . Archived from the original on 30 May 2016 . Retrieved 13 May 2016 . ^ "The Turning Point: Free Primary Education in Kenya – NORRAG" . norrag.org . Archived from the original on 4 February 2021 . Retrieved 21 December 2020 . ^ "Africa | Free secondary schools for Kenya" . BBC News . 11 February 2008. Archived from the original on 3 December 2012 . Retrieved 26 February 2013 . ^ "Kenya president signs tough 'anti-terror' law" . Al Jazeera. 19 December 2014. Archived from the original on 22 December 2014 . Retrieved 22 December 2014 . ^ Kenya – Foreign Relations Archived 23 April 2016 at the Wayback Machine . Retrieved on 16 January 2015. ^ "Opinion of the United States" . Pewglobal.org. 22 June 2006. Archived from the original on 5 April 2019 . Retrieved 17 July 2016 . ^ Epatko, Larisa, "Why Obama Is Visiting Senegal, South Africa and Tanzania But Not Kenya" Archived 21 January 2014 at the Wayback Machine , PBS NewsHour , 25 June 2013. Retrieved 18 August 2013. ^ a b Raghavan, Sudarsan, "In snub to Washington, Kenyan president visits China, Russia first" Archived 29 November 2014 at the Wayback Machine , Washington Post , 17 August 2013. Ambassador Liu's comments at capitalfm.co.ke linked to capitalfm.co.ke Archived 18 August 2013 at the Wayback Machine . Retrieved 18 August 2013. ^ George Kegoro. "Circumstances created need that made visit possible" . Nation.co.ke. Archived from the original on 28 August 2016 . Retrieved 17 July 2016 . ^ " Britain's secret killing fields Archived 6 August 2019 at the Wayback Machine ". The Guardian . 1 July 2001 ^ "The British Army in Africa" . army.mod.uk/ . Ministry of Defence. Archived from the original on 30 June 2016 . Retrieved 20 June 2016 . ^ Ministry of Defence. "Kenya Defence Forces Act – No. 25 of 2012" . National Council for Law Reporting. Archived from the original (PDF) on 3 October 2018 . Retrieved 6 May 2014 . ^ "Commission of Inquiry into the Post Election Violence" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 20 December 2008. ^ "Kenya National Commission on Human Rights" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 14 February 2012. ^ Security men accused of torture and rape Archived 3 July 2017 at the Wayback Machine Daily Nation. 11 January 2008. ^ The Standard 31 October 2010 Activists give military 5 days to re-admit recruit INTERNET standardmedia.co.ke [ permanent dead link ] Cited on 3 January 2011 ^ The Standard Sh 1.6 billion tender rocks the DoD INTERNET standardmedia.co.ke Cited on 3 January 2011 ^ For example the decision to acquire ex-Jordanian F5 fighter aircraft. See The Standard Kenya's 'new' fighter jets cannot take off INTERNET standardmedia.co.ke [ permanent dead link ] Cited on 3 January 2011 ^ Kenya Roads Board Constituency funding under the RMLF ^ "Laws on Homosexuality in African Nations" . Library of Congress . 2015. Archived from the original on 19 June 2017 . Retrieved 3 June 2017 . ^ Poushter, Jacob; Kent, Nicholas (25 June 2020). "The Global Divide on Homosexuality Persists" . Pew Research Center. Archived from the original on 1 July 2022 . Retrieved 6 August 2022 . ^ Scott, Holmes, Eugene, Kristen (25 July 2017). "Obama lectures Kenyan president on gay rights" . CNN. Archived from the original on 15 May 2020 . Retrieved 24 April 2020 . {{ cite news }} : CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) ^ " 'The Cry of Blood' — Report on Extra-Judicial Killings and Disappearances" (PDF) . Kenya National Commission on Human Rights /Enforced Disappearances Information Exchange Center. 25 September 2008. Archived from the original on 14 December 2010 . Retrieved 29 December 2010 . ^ "Was extra-judicial killing of Eastleigh 'thugs' justified? Kenyans divided » Capital News" . 1 April 2017. Archived from the original on 19 June 2017 . Retrieved 29 June 2017 . ^ "Kenyan Economy – The National Treasury" . Archived from the original on 28 February 2024 . Retrieved 28 February 2024 . ^ "Foreign direct investment (FDI) in Kenya - International Trade Portal" . www.lloydsbanktrade.com . Archived from the original on 28 February 2024 . Retrieved 28 February 2024 . ^ Ludeki Chweya, John Kithome Tuta & S. Kichamu Akivaga 2005 . ^ "Multidimensional Poverty Index 2023: Kenya" (PDF) . United Nations Development Programme . 2023 . Retrieved 20 December 2024 . ^ "Doing Business in Kenya – World Bank Group" . doingbusiness.org . Archived from the original on 10 September 2018 . Retrieved 14 January 2017 . ^ a b c d e "Country Profile: Kenya" (PDF) . Federal Research Division . Library of Congress. June 2007. Archived (PDF) from the original on 5 May 2015 . Retrieved 23 April 2011 . ^ a b "Food Assistance Fact Sheet – Kenya" . USAID . Archived from the original on 10 June 2016 . Retrieved 13 May 2016 . ^ Fengler, Wolfgang (5 December 2012). "Kenya Economic Update" . The World Bank . Archived from the original on 9 March 2013 . Retrieved 29 May 2013 . ^ https://kenyainnovationweek.com/ ^ "Kenya Innovation Week 2024 Africa Edition" . ^ "Diaspora remittances now Kenya's largest foreign exchange earner" . The East African . 20 January 2023. Archived from the original on 27 February 2024 . Retrieved 27 February 2024 . ^ "Kenya Tourism Board" . KTB.go.ke . Archived from the original on 19 February 2017 . Retrieved 2 March 2017 . ^ "Kenya Law: January 2017" . KenyaLaw.org . Archived from the original on 5 August 2013 . Retrieved 2 March 2017 . ^ "Drought leaves two million Kenyans in need of food aid" . United Nations World Food Programme . 26 April 2005. Archived from the original on 14 August 2016 . Retrieved 5 August 2016 . ^ Pigeonpea in Eastern and Southern Africa Archived 18 July 2014 at the Wayback Machine . ICRISAT Posted 10 October 2012. Downloaded 26 January 2014. ^ Towards Achieving Food Security in Kenya Archived 26 January 2012 at the Wayback Machine . Joseph Kinyua, Permanent Secretary, Ministry of Agriculture, Kenya; 1 April 2004, Kampala, Uganda ^ Republic of Kenya, Ministry of Water and Irrigation (2009) National Irrigation and Drainage Policy :3–4. ^ a b c Veselinovic, Milena (16 March 2015). "Got roses this Valentine's Day? They probably came from Kenya" . CNN. Archived from the original on 14 July 2016 . Retrieved 17 July 2016 . ^ "Cement production keeps pace with growing demand" . Construction Business Review . 5 September 2015. Archived from the original on 13 May 2016 . Retrieved 13 May 2016 . ^ "Kenya: Employers' organizations taking the lead on linking the informal sector to formal Kenyan enterprises" . ilo.org . 2 August 2005. Archived from the original on 5 June 2016 . Retrieved 13 May 2016 . ^ "Jua Kali sector plays key role in economic development and job creation" . MyGov . 13 November 2015. Archived from the original on 10 June 2016 . Retrieved 13 May 2016 . ^ Kamau, Pithon. "Industry" . Brand Kenya Board . Archived from the original on 4 June 2016 . Retrieved 13 May 2016 . ^ "Kenya" . Archived from the original on 3 August 2020 . Retrieved 10 June 2016 . ^ "How to get rich in the 21st century" . The Economist . 2 January 2024. ISSN 0013-0613 . Archived from the original on 3 January 2024 . Retrieved 3 January 2024 . ^ Electricity in Kenya Archived 2018-08-11 at the Wayback Machine . IEA 2014 ^ "Peak Demands – Summary of Electricity Sub Sector Statistics" . Kenya Ministry of Energy. Archived from the original on 7 December 2019 . Retrieved 11 November 2019 . ^ "Kenya plans nuclear plant by 2027" . The East African . 5 December 2017. Archived from the original on 27 December 2017 . Retrieved 26 December 2017 . ^ McGregor, Sarah (20 September 2010) Kenya Aims to Build a Nuclear Power Plant by 2017 Archived 15 November 2013 at the Wayback Machine . Bloomberg L.P. ^ Kenya From Nowhere Plans East Africa's First Oil Exports: Energy Archived 25 July 2014 at the Wayback Machine . Bloomberg L.P. ^ Kenya plans strategic oil reserve . Reuters (10 November 2011). ^ Jackson Okoth; Philip Mwakio (14 February 2014). "Standard Digital News : : Business – Kenya joins mineral exporters as first titanium cargo leaves port" . Standard Digital News . Archived from the original on 28 January 2015 . Retrieved 15 February 2015 . ^ Shem Oirere (23 October 2014). "Construction of Kenyan standard-gauge line suspended" . Archived from the original on 29 January 2015 . Retrieved 15 February 2015 . ^ NEWS: Kenya's National Climate Change Action Plan is officially launched Archived 14 May 2013 at the Wayback Machine , Climate & Development Knowledge Network, 28 March 2013 ^ "Kenya Climate Change Country Profile" . climatelinks.org . Archived from the original on 31 December 2021 . Retrieved 14 April 2022 . ^ BBC News – Kenya oil discovery after Tullow Oil drilling Archived 18 March 2018 at the Wayback Machine . BBC. 26 March 2012. ^ Barber, Lionel; England, Andrew (10 August 2006). "China's scramble for Africa finds a welcome in Kenya" . Financial Times . Archived from the original on 13 May 2010 . Retrieved 27 June 2008 . ^ a b Kimeu, Caroline (30 May 2023). "After a plastic bag ban, Kenya takes another shot at its pollution problem" . The Guardian . ISSN 0261-3077 . Archived from the original on 18 May 2024 . Retrieved 6 October 2023 . ^ "World Bank Open Data" . World Bank Open Data . Archived from the original on 26 May 2023 . Retrieved 5 March 2024 . ^ "Kenya beats sub-Saharan Africa peers in World Bank global human capital index" . Business Daily . 21 December 2020. Archived from the original on 1 April 2024 . Retrieved 5 March 2024 . ^ "Kenya" . MFI Upgrading and Rating Initiative of the Development Bank of Austria . Archived from the original on 3 June 2013 . Retrieved 25 September 2015 . ^ Saylor, Michael (2012). The Mobile Wave: How Mobile Intelligence Will Change Everything . Perseus Books/Vanguard Press. p. 202; 304. ISBN 978-1593157203 . ^ Tavneet Suri, and, William Jack (2016). "The Long-run Poverty and Gender Impacts of Mobile Money". Science . 354 (6317): 1288– 1292. Bibcode : 2016Sci...354.1288S . doi : 10.1126/science.aah5309 . PMID 27940873 . S2CID 42992837 . ^ "World Population Prospects 2022" . United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs , Population Division . Retrieved 17 July 2022 . ^ "World Population Prospects 2022: Demographic indicators by region, subregion and country, annually for 1950-2100" (XSLX) ("Total Population, as of 1 July (thousands)"). United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs , Population Division . Retrieved 17 July 2022 . ^ " Why a new president may slow population growth Archived 15 February 2009 at the Wayback Machine ". The Christian Science Monitor . 14 January 2008. ^ Zinkina J.; Korotayev A. (2014). "Explosive Population Growth in Tropical Africa: Crucial Omission in Development Forecasts (Emerging Risks and Way Out)" . World Futures . 70 (2): 120– 139. CiteSeerX 10.1.1.691.8612 . doi : 10.1080/02604027.2014.894868 . S2CID 53051943 . Archived from the original on 9 January 2022 . Retrieved 11 January 2020 . ^ " Exploding population Archived 15 July 2014 at the Wayback Machine ". The New York Times . 7 January 2008. ^ Karanja, Muchiri (3 September 2010). "Myth shattered: Kibera numbers fail to add up" . Daily Nation . Archived from the original on 6 December 2018 . Retrieved 4 September 2010 . ^ "World Water Day Focus on Global Sewage Flood" . National Geographic . 22 March 2010. Archived from the original on 15 January 2012 . Retrieved 10 February 2012 . ^ The UN Refugee Agency Archived 23 December 2011 at the Wayback Machine . Unhcr.org. ^ Balaton-Chrimes, Samantha (2020). "Who are Kenya's 42(+) tribes? The census and the political utility of magical uncertainty" . Journal of Eastern African Studies . 15 : 43– 62. doi : 10.1080/17531055.2020.1863642 . ISSN 1753-1055 . S2CID 231681524 . ^ a b Asongu, J. J.; Marr, Marvee (2007). Doing Business Abroad: A Handbook for Expatriates . Greenview Publishing Co. pp. 12 & 112. ISBN 978-0-9797976-3-7 . ^ Peak Revision K.C.P.E. Social Studies . East African Publishers. ISBN 9789966254504 . ^ Proquest Info & Learning (COR) (2009). Culturegrams: World Edition . p. 98. ISBN 978-0-9778091-6-5 . ^ Brown, E. K.; Asher, R. E.; Simpson, J. M. Y. (2006). Encyclopedia of language & linguistics, Volume 1, Edition 2 . Elsevier. p. 181. ISBN 978-0-08-044299-0 . ^ Nyaggah, Lynette Behm. "Cross-linguistic influence in Kenyan English: The impact of Swahili and Kikuyu on syntax" . University of California. Archived from the original on 26 December 2016 . Retrieved 8 August 2014 . ^ Derek Nurse, Gérard Philippson (2006). Bantu Languages . Routledge. p. 197. ISBN 978-1-135-79683-9 . Archived from the original on 3 August 2016 . Retrieved 20 October 2014 . ^ Languages of Kenya Archived 23 November 2012 at the Wayback Machine . Ethnologue.com. ^ "2019 Kenya Population and Housing Census Volume III: Distribution of Population by Age and Sex" . Kenya National Bureau of Statistics . Archived from the original on 2 August 2020 . Retrieved 8 April 2020 . ^ Address data base of Reformed churches and institutions Archived 3 April 2013 at the Wayback Machine . Reformiert-online.net. Retrieved 16 April 2013. ^ The World Reformed Fellowship – Promoting Reformed Partnerships Worldwide – News . Wrfnet.org. Retrieved 16 April 2013. ^ "Kenya" . Oikoumene.org. 3 February 2008. Archived from the original on 11 March 2008 . Retrieved 26 February 2013 . ^ Samuel, Bill. "World Distribution of Quakers, 2012 - QuakerInfo.com" . quakerinfo.com . Archived from the original on 17 January 2019 . Retrieved 24 December 2018 . ^ "Kenya: International Religious Freedom Report 2008" . U.S. Department of State . 2008. Archived from the original on 19 April 2010 . Retrieved 16 April 2010 . ^ "AIC Mission Hospital Kapsowar Official Website" . Archived from the original on 28 June 2019. ^ Sectoral Perspectives on Corruption in Kenya: The Case of Public Health Care Delivery (PDF) , Kenya Anti-Corruption Commission, February 2010, archived (PDF) from the original on 19 January 2023 , retrieved 16 February 2023 ^ UNICEF Statistics: Kenya Archived 4 June 2019 at the Wayback Machine . Unicef.org. ^ Infant Mortality ranks Archived 2 August 2020 at the Wayback Machine . The World Factbook ^ "WHO Health-Related Millennium Development Goals Report 2011" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 17 June 2012. ^ Poverty Incidence in Kenya Declined Significantly, but Unlikely to be Eradicated by 2030 . Archived from the original on 26 March 2023 . Retrieved 26 March 2023 . ^ CIA World Factbook: HIV/AIDS – Adult Prevalence Rate Rankings Archived 29 March 2019 at the Wayback Machine . Cia.gov. Retrieved 23 April 2012. ^ World AIDS Day Report 2011 Archived 1 June 2013 at the Wayback Machine . UNAIDS ^ "Kenya" Archived 28 February 2021 at the Wayback Machine , pp. 111–113 in World Malaria report 2009 . WHO. ^ Makori, Linet; Gichana, Haggray; Oyugi, Elvis; Nyale, George; Ransom, James (2021). "Tuberculosis in an urban hospital setting: Descriptive epidemiology among patients at Kenyatta National Hospital TB clinic, Nairobi, Kenya" . International Journal of Africa Nursing Sciences . 15 . doi : 10.1016/j.ijans.2021.100308 . ^ "Global Hunger Index Scores by 2024 GHI Rank" . Global Hunger Index (GHI) - peer-reviewed annual publication designed to comprehensively measure and track hunger at the global, regional, and country levels . Retrieved 20 December 2024 . ^ "IFs Forecast – Version 7.00 – Google Public Data Explorer" . Archived from the original on 7 April 2015 . Retrieved 15 February 2015 . ^ Kenya – Kenya Demographic and Health Survey 2008–09 Archived 2 January 2019 at the Wayback Machine . Kenya National Data Archive (KeNADA) ^ "WHO – Female genital mutilation and other harmful practices" . Archived from the original on 29 October 2010 . Retrieved 15 February 2015 . ^ Boseley, Sarah (8 September 2011). "FGM: Kenya acts against unkindest cut" . The Guardian . London. Archived from the original on 17 June 2017 . Retrieved 7 January 2012 . ^ a b c "Women's participation in the kenyan society" (PDF) . Center for International Private Enterprise . Archived from the original (PDF) on 11 January 2011 . Retrieved 2 February 2018 . ^ "Demographic and Health Survey 2014" (PDF) . Kenya National Bureau of Statistics . Archived (PDF) from the original on 3 April 2019 . Retrieved 2 February 2018 . ^ a b "MAKING JUSTICE WORK FOR WOMEN Kenya Country Report" (PDF) . Sydney eScholarship Repository . Archived (PDF) from the original on 3 February 2018 . Retrieved 2 February 2018 . ^ "Const2010" . kenyalaw.org . Archived from the original on 7 June 2018 . Retrieved 25 February 2022 . ^ "Out of 47.6 million Kenyans, 35.7 million are under the age of 35" . Citizen Digital . 21 February 2020. Archived from the original on 7 February 2022 . Retrieved 25 February 2022 . ^ a b D.G, Kabata. "Why youth unemployment problem require more than a strait jacket solution" . The Standard . Archived from the original on 25 February 2022 . Retrieved 25 February 2022 . ^ "Youth Enterprise Development Fund" . Archived from the original on 16 March 2022 . Retrieved 25 February 2022 . ^ "Women Enterprise Fund – Kenya – 50 Million African Women Speak" . womenconnect.org . Archived from the original on 25 February 2022 . Retrieved 25 February 2022 . ^ "Kikao Mtaani" . youth.go.ke . Archived from the original on 25 February 2022 . Retrieved 25 February 2022 . ^ "The Uwezo Fund – A flagship programme for vision 2030" . Archived from the original on 25 February 2022 . Retrieved 25 February 2022 . ^ "Home | Future Bora Innovation Challenge" . Future Bora . Archived from the original on 25 February 2022 . Retrieved 25 February 2022 . ^ PLC, Standard Group. "studio mashinani" . The Standard . Archived from the original on 25 February 2022 . Retrieved 25 February 2022 . ^ Reporter, Standard. "Government to review Early Childhood Development policy" . Standard Digital News . Archived from the original on 22 August 2016 . Retrieved 23 June 2016 . ^ a b "Primary School Education in Kenya" . kenyapage.net . Archived from the original on 12 April 2017 . Retrieved 10 June 2016 . ^ "Literacy rate, adult total (% of people ages 15 and above) – Kenya | Data" . data.worldbank.org . Archived from the original on 28 January 2021 . Retrieved 22 January 2021 . ^ "Literacy rate, adult total (% of people ages 15 and above) – Sub-Saharan Africa | Data" . data.worldbank.org . Archived from the original on 16 April 2021 . Retrieved 22 January 2021 . ^ World Intellectual Property Organization (2024). Global Innovation Index 2024: Unlocking the Promise of Social Entrepreneurship . World Intellectual Property Organization. p. 18. doi : 10.34667/tind.50062 . ISBN 978-92-805-3681-2 . Retrieved 6 October 2024 . {{ cite book }} : |website= ignored ( help ) ^ Africa in China's 21st Century: In Search of a Strategy . Independently published. 3 December 2017. ISBN 978-1973456803 . ^ On the Beat – Tapping the Potential of Kenya's Music Industry Archived 3 November 2011 at the Wayback Machine , WIPO Magazine (July 2007). ^ a b IAAF: Changes of Allegiance 1998 to 2005 [ usurped ] ^ Mynott, Adam (20 May 2005). "Kenya examines track star defections" . BBC News . Archived from the original on 17 April 2016 . Retrieved 10 June 2016 . ^ "Furious Kenyans threaten to defect over taxes" . Reuters . 22 January 2014. Archived from the original on 5 August 2016 . Retrieved 10 June 2016 . ^ "Why the defections?" . mobile.nation.co.ke . Archived from the original on 18 August 2016 . Retrieved 10 June 2016 . ^ "Kenya women's volleyball caps three decades of excellence | Kenya Page Blog" . kenyapage.net . 20 June 2015. Archived from the original on 12 June 2016 . Retrieved 10 June 2016 . ^ "Volleyball: Champions Kenya Scoop Major Continental Awards |" . chimpreports.com . 21 June 2015. Archived from the original on 3 August 2016 . Retrieved 10 June 2016 . ^ ":: Cricket Kenya" . cricketkenya.co.ke . Archived from the original on 28 March 2016 . Retrieved 10 June 2016 . ^ "Kenya win Singapore Sevens title" . SuperSport . 17 April 2016. Archived from the original on 21 June 2016 . Retrieved 10 June 2016 . ^ "Kenya beat Fiji to win their first Sevens World Series title" . BBC Sport . Archived from the original on 20 April 2016 . Retrieved 10 June 2016 . ^ Sport, Telegraph (17 April 2016). "HSBC World Rugby Sevens Series: Kenya shock Fiji and win maiden title in Singapore" . The Telegraph . Archived from the original on 19 June 2016 . Retrieved 10 June 2016 . ^ New Vision, 3 June 2004: Wrangles land Kenya indefinite FIFA ban Archived 10 January 2008 at the Wayback Machine ^ The Auto Channel, 21 July 2001: FIA RALLY: Delecour takes points finish on Safari Rally debut Archived 10 December 2007 at the Wayback Machine ^ 1993 FIBA Africa Championship for Men Archived 8 October 2017 at the Wayback Machine , ARCHIVE.FIBA.COM. Retrieved 24 January 2016. ^ Color of Hockey: Kenya Ice Lions ready to roar Archived 27 May 2022 at the Wayback Machine – NHL ^ Hockey visit to Kenya Archived 27 May 2022 at the Wayback Machine – IIHF ^ Solar Ice Rink Archived 7 July 2022 at the Wayback Machine – The Panari Hotel ^ "Kenyan skaters flock to East Africa's first ice rink" . The Mail & Guardian . 25 December 2005. ^ "Fast food finds fans in sub-Sahara Africa, where obesity problem is growing" . NBC News . 24 October 2012. Archived from the original on 16 January 2013 . Retrieved 26 February 2013 . ^ US fast food chain to open first Kenya outlet in August – Money Markets Archived 23 October 2018 at the Wayback Machine . businessdailyafrica.com. Retrieved 9 August 2013. ^ "Restaurants in Nairobi, Kenya - Yellow Pages Online Directory" . yellowpageskenya.com . Archived from the original on 27 April 2023 . Retrieved 27 April 2023 . ^ Kenyans are gradually loving cheese Archived 14 November 2017 at the Wayback Machine , africanews.com, 4 September 2016. ^ Entrepreneur grows her hobby into a successful cheese making business Archived 14 November 2017 at the Wayback Machine , howwemadeitinafrica.com, 23 August 2013. Sources and further reading Ndemo, Bitange; Weiss, Tim, eds. (2017). Digital Kenya: An Entrepreneurial Revolution in the Making . Springer Nature . ISBN 9781137578808 . Ludeki Chweya; John Kithome Tuta; S. Kichamu Akivaga (2005), Control of Corruption in Kenya: Legal-political Dimensions , The University of Michigan , p. 259, ISBN 978-9966-915-55-9 Mwaura N (2005). Kenya Today: Breaking the Yoke of Colonialism in Africa . Algora Publishing. p. 238. ISBN 9780875863214 . External links Kenya at Wikipedia's sister projects Definitions from Wiktionary Media from Commons News from Wikinews Quotations from Wikiquote Texts from Wikisource Textbooks from Wikibooks Resources from Wikiversity Travel information from Wikivoyage Official website of the Parliament of Kenya Wikimedia Atlas of Kenya Kenya . The World Factbook . Central Intelligence Agency . Kenya profile from Africa.com Kenya Corruption Profile from the Business Anti-Corruption Portal World Bank Summary Trade Statistics Kenya , 2010 v t e Kenya articles History Timeline Wanga Kingdom Indian Ocean slave trade East Africa Protectorate Uganda Railway Kenya Colony In World War II Ilemi Triangle Kenya African Union Mau Mau rebellion 1963 Constitution 1982 coup d'état attempt Goldenberg scandal 1992 Elections 2007–2008 crisis 2010 referendum 2013 Elections Geography Biosphere reserves Climate Ecoregions Environmental issues Great Rift Valley Lakes Mountains Protected areas Rivers Volcanoes Wildlife World Heritage Sites Subdivisions Cities Counties Politics Constitution Elections Foreign relations Government Human rights Intersex LGBT rights Judiciary Law enforcement Military Parliament Building Political parties President list Deputy President Prime Minister (defunct) Economy Agriculture Central bank Coffee Energy Real Estate Shilling (currency) Telecommunications Tourism Transport Society Child marriage Corruption Crime Demographics Education Health Human trafficking Languages Polygamy Prostitution Religion Squatting Water supply and sanitation Women Culture Anthem Cinema Coat of arms English Engsh Flag Names Literature Media Museums Music Public holidays Sports Sheng Swahili Video gaming Outline Index Category Portal v t e Countries and territories of Africa Sovereign states Algeria Angola Benin Botswana Burkina Faso Burundi Cameroon Cape Verde Central African Republic Chad Comoros Democratic Republic of the Congo Republic of the Congo Djibouti Egypt (partly in Asia) Equatorial Guinea Eritrea Eswatini Ethiopia Gabon The Gambia Ghana Guinea Guinea-Bissau Ivory Coast Kenya Lesotho Liberia Libya Madagascar Malawi Mali Mauritania Mauritius Morocco Mozambique Namibia Niger Nigeria Rwanda São Tomé and Príncipe Senegal Seychelles Sierra Leone Somalia South Africa South Sudan Sudan Tanzania Togo Tunisia Uganda Zambia Zimbabwe States with limited recognition Sahrawi Arab Democratic Republic ( unclear sovereignty ) Somaliland Dependent territories France Îles Éparses United Kingdom Saint Helena, Ascension and Tristan da Cunha African territories fully part of non-African states France Mayotte Réunion Italy Pantelleria Pelagie Islands Portugal Madeira Savage Islands Spain Canary Islands Ceuta Melilla Plazas de soberanía Yemen Socotra Category Africa portal Articles related to Kenya v t e First- and second-level administrative divisions of Kenya 47 counties (since March 2013) Baringo (30) Bomet (36) Bungoma (39) Busia (40) Elgeyo-Marakwet (28) Embu (14) Garissa (07) Homa Bay (43) Isiolo (11) Kajiado (34) Kakamega (37) Kericho (35) Kiambu (22) Kilifi (03) Kirinyaga (20) Kisii (45) Kisumu (42) Kitui (15) Kwale (02) Laikipia (31) Lamu (05) Machakos (16) Makueni (17) Mandera (09) Marsabit (10) Meru (12) Migori (44) Mombasa (01) Murang'a (21) Nairobi (47) Nakuru (32) Nandi (29) Narok (33) Nyamira (46) Nyandarua (18) Nyeri (19) Samburu (25) Siaya (41) Taita-Taveta (06) Tana River (04) Tharaka-Nithi (13) Trans-Nzoia (26) Turkana (23) Uasin Gishu (27) Vihiga (38) Wajir (08) West Pokot (24) Principal cities and towns Nairobi (capital) Athi River Baragoi Bomet Bungoma Busia Chuka Eldoret Embu Garissa Hola Homa Bay Isiolo Iten Kabarnet Kajiado Kakamega Kapsabet Kangundo - Tala Kapenguria Karuri Kericho Kerugoya Kiambu Kibwezi Kikuyu Kilifi Kisii Kisumu Kitale Kitengela Kitui Kwale Limuru Lodwar Lokichogio Loiyangalani Lamu Machakos Makindu Malindi Mandera Maralal Marsabit Masii Meru Mombasa Moyale Mtito Andei Mumias Murang'a Mutomo Mwingi Naivasha Nakuru Namanga Nanyuki Narok Nyahururu Nyamira Nyeri Ol Kalou Ongata Rongai Ruiru Siaya Thika Vihiga Voi Wajir Webuye Wote Wundanyi v t e Years in Kenya (1963–present) 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 1990 1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 1980 1981 1982 1983 1984 1985 1986 1987 1988 1989 1970 1971 1972 1973 1974 1975 1976 1977 1978 1979 Pre-1963 1963 1964 1965 1966 1967 1968 1969 v t e Members of the Commonwealth of Nations Sovereign states (members) Antigua and Barbuda Australia Bahamas Bangladesh Barbados Belize Botswana Brunei Cameroon Canada Cyprus Dominica Eswatini (Swaziland) Fiji Gabon Gambia Ghana Grenada Guyana India Jamaica Kenya Kiribati Lesotho Malawi Malaysia Maldives Malta Mauritius Mozambique Namibia Nauru New Zealand Nigeria Pakistan Papua New Guinea Rwanda Saint Kitts and Nevis Saint Lucia Saint Vincent and the Grenadines Samoa Seychelles Sierra Leone Singapore Solomon Islands South Africa Sri Lanka Tanzania Togo Tonga Trinidad and Tobago Tuvalu Uganda United Kingdom Vanuatu Zambia Associated states Cook Islands Niue Dependent territories Australia Ashmore and Cartier Islands Australian Antarctic Territory Christmas Island Cocos (Keeling) Islands Coral Sea Islands Heard Island and McDonald Islands Norfolk Island New Zealand Ross Dependency Tokelau United Kingdom Akrotiri and Dhekelia Anguilla Bermuda British Antarctic Territory British Indian Ocean Territory British Virgin Islands Cayman Islands Falkland Islands Gibraltar Guernsey Isle of Man Jersey Montserrat Pitcairn Islands Saint Helena, Ascension and Tristan da Cunha South Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands Turks and Caicos Islands Source: Commonwealth Secretariat – Member Countries v t e Countries and regions in the Somali plate Countries Comoros Eswatini Kenya Madagascar Mauritius Mozambique Seychelles Somalia Somaliland Tanzania Uganda Regions KwaZulu-Natal (South Africa) Mayotte (France) Réunion (France) Socotra (Yemen) Somali Region (Ethiopia) v t e African Union History Pan-Africanism Decolonisation of Africa Union of African States Casablanca Group Monrovia Group African and Malagasy Union Abuja Treaty Sirte Declaration Lome Summit Organisation of African Unity Chairperson Secretary General Geography Borders Extreme points Member states Regions Organs Executive Council Permanent Representatives' Committee Specialized Technical Committees Assembly Chairperson Commission Chairperson Deputy Chairperson AUCC 2025 election Pan-African Parliament Bureau Secretariat Gallagher Estate African Court of Justice African Court on Human and Peoples' Rights ECOSOCC Committees Department of Education, Science, Technology and Innovation Department of Political Affairs, Peace and Security Department of Infrastructure and Energy Department of Health, Humanitarian Affairs and Social Development HR, Sciences and Technology Department of Agriculture, Rural Development, and Blue Economy Department of Economic Development, Trade, Tourism, Industry, Mining Cross-Cutting Programs Financial institutions African Central Bank African Monetary Fund African Investment Bank Peace and Security Council ACIRC African Standby Force Panel of the Wise UNAMID AMIB AMIS AMISOM MISCA Specialised agencies and institutions Africa Centres for Disease Control and Prevention African Civil Aviation Commission African Energy Commission Afripol African Space Agency Politics APRM Foreign relations African Charter on Human and Peoples' Rights African Commission on Human and Peoples' Rights Enlargement United States Africa Command ( United States military bases ) United States ambassadors African Union–Ethiopia relations Symbols Anthem Emblem Flag Passport Economy Currencies ( Gold standard ) Development Bank African Economic Community NEPAD African Continental Free Trade Area Single African Air Transport Market Trans-African Highway network Culture Africa Day African Border Day Theory Afro Federal Africa United States of Latin Africa East African Federation Category v t e Nations in the Group of 15 (G-15) Summits 1990 1991 1992 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2004 2006 2010 2012 Members Algeria Argentina Brazil Chile Egypt India Indonesia Iran Jamaica Kenya Malaysia Mexico Nigeria Senegal Sri Lanka Venezuela Zimbabwe v t e Countries and territories bordering the Indian Ocean Africa Comoros Djibouti Egypt Eritrea France Mayotte Réunion Kenya Madagascar Mauritius Mozambique Seychelles Somalia Somaliland South Africa Sudan Tanzania Asia Bahrain Bangladesh British Indian Ocean Territory United Kingdom Christmas Island (Australia) Cocos (Keeling) Islands (Australia) India Indonesia Iran Iraq Israel Jordan Kuwait Malaysia Maldives Myanmar Oman Pakistan Qatar Saudi Arabia Singapore Sri Lanka Thailand Timor-Leste United Arab Emirates Yemen Other Antarctica Australian Antarctic Territory French Southern and Antarctic Lands Heard Island and McDonald Islands Australia Geographic locale Lat. and Long. 1°16′S 36°48′E ﻿ / ﻿ 1.267°S 36.800°E ﻿ / -1.267; 36.800 (Nairobi) Languages v t e English-speaking world English speaking countries Further links Articles English-speaking world History of the English language British Empire English in the Commonwealth of Nations Anglosphere Lists List of countries by English-speaking population List of countries where English is an official language Countries and territories where English is the national language or the native language of the majority Africa Saint Helena, Ascension and Tristan da Cunha Americas Anguilla Antigua and Barbuda The Bahamas Barbados Belize Bermuda British Virgin Islands Canada Cayman Islands Dominica Falkland Islands Grenada Guyana Jamaica Montserrat Saba Saint Kitts and Nevis Saint Lucia Saint Vincent and the Grenadines Sint Eustatius Sint Maarten South Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands Trinidad and Tobago Turks and Caicos Islands United States United States Virgin Islands Europe Guernsey Ireland Isle of Man Jersey United Kingdom Oceania Australia New Zealand Norfolk Island Pitcairn Islands Countries and territories where English is an official language, but not the majority first language Africa Botswana Cameroon Eswatini The Gambia Ghana Kenya Lesotho Liberia Malawi Mauritius Namibia Nigeria Rwanda Sierra Leone Somaliland South Africa South Sudan Sudan Tanzania Uganda Zambia Zimbabwe Americas Puerto Rico Asia Christmas Island Cocos (Keeling) Islands Hong Kong India Pakistan Philippines Singapore Europe Gibraltar Akrotiri and Dhekelia Malta Oceania American Samoa Cook Islands Fiji Guam Kiribati Marshall Islands Micronesia Nauru Niue Northern Mariana Islands Palau Papua New Guinea Samoa Solomon Islands Tokelau Tuvalu Vanuatu Dependencies shown in italics . Portals : Kenya Geography Africa Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Australia Czech Republic Spain Sweden Israel Geographic MusicBrainz area Artists KulturNav People UK Parliament Other IdRef Historical Dictionary of Switzerland NARA Encyclopedia of Modern Ukraine İslâm Ansiklopedisi 1°N 38°E ﻿ / ﻿ 1°N 38°E ﻿ / 1; 38 Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Kenya&oldid=1289192589 " Categories : Kenya Republics in the Commonwealth of Nations Countries and territories where English is an official language G15 nations Member states of the African Union Member states of the Commonwealth of Nations Member states of the United Nations East African countries States and territories established in 1963 Swahili-speaking countries and territories 1963 establishments in Africa Countries in Africa Hidden categories: Articles containing Swahili (macrolanguage)-language text All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from February 2023 Articles with permanently dead external links Webarchive template wayback links Articles with dead external links from December 2017 CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list CS1: unfit URL CS1 errors: periodical ignored Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Wikipedia pages semi-protected against vandalism Use Kenyan English from January 2022 All Wikipedia articles written in Kenyan English Use dmy dates from December 2019 Articles containing explicitly cited English-language text Wikipedia articles scheduled for update tagging All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from February 2024 Wikipedia articles needing clarification from December 2019 Articles with excerpts Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2005 All articles containing potentially dated statements Articles containing potentially dated statements from May 2011 Articles with unsourced statements from March 2023 Articles needing additional references from December 2020 All articles needing additional references Articles with unsourced statements from October 2024 Pages using Sister project links with hidden wikidata Pages using Sister project links with default search Official website different in Wikidata and Wikipedia Coordinates on Wikidata This page was last edited on 7 May 2025, at 01:34 (UTC) . Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc. , a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Kenya 267 languages Add topicFactchecking Kenya’s chief justice on judiciary funding and backlog of cases - Africa Check Skip to main content English Français Main navigation Fact-checks Reports Factsheets Guides Spot Checks Blog Meta programme fact-checks Republish our work Who we are Our team Our impact How we are funded Partners Get in touch What we do Info Finder African Fact-Checking Awards Corrections Fact-checking research Training Media Literacy Educator knowledge hub How we fact-check Corrections policy Code of principles How we rate claims Get Involved Donate Submit a claim to fact-check Partner with us Join our team Fact-checking tips Quizzes Donate Back to Africa Check Factchecking Kenya’s chief justice on judiciary funding and backlog of cases Published on 17 September 2020 Claim Six claims about the Kenyan judiciary, from its budget and number of cases to how many judges and magistrates serve Kenya’s population. Verdict Four correct, one understated and one unproven Source Kenya’s chief justice, David Maraga (August 2020) This article is more than 4 years old Maraga was largely correct about the judiciary budget and how many Kenyans are served per judge and magistrate in the country. The chief justice was also correct that the number of cases filed in Kenyan courts every year exceeds the number of cases the judiciary settles by as much as 100,000, causing an ever-growing backlog. But there isn’t evidence of a global average for comparing the number of judges and magistrates per population – there are too many variables in different legal systems. To mark the tenth anniversary of Kenya’s constitution , broadcaster NTV interviewed current and former government officials on how the law has been applied. Chief justice David Maraga told NTV that while the 2010 constitution had sought to strengthen the judiciary’s independence, funding was a perennial headache. “[Budget cuts] hit the judiciary sometimes to a point that its operations grind to a halt,” Maraga said in the interview , published in August 2020. In recent months the chief justice has been vocal on how cuts have hampered the delivery of judicial services. In his interview, Maraga made several claims. We looked into their accuracy. Claim The judiciary does not even get 1% of the national budget Verdict correct Maraga, who assumed office in 2016, asked for more funding as “the judiciary does not even get 1% of the national budget”. “We have said, over and over again, that for the judiciary to operate properly we should get at least 2.5% of the national budget,” he said . Africa Check has previously found there isn’t a “recommended global percentage” of funding for the judiciary from the national budget. In 2018 Maraga also claimed it was 2.5%. To determine how much has been allocated to the judiciary in recent years we consulted the appropriation acts, the laws that show budget allocations to government departments. For the national budget, we checked budget statements. Judiciary amounts as share of Kenya budget Year Judiciary budget (KSh billion) National budget (KSh trillion) Share 2014/15 17.5 1.58 1.1% 2015/16 16.7 2 0.8% 2016/17 17.3 2.3 0.8% 2017/18 17.6 2.3 0.8% 2018/19 14.5 2.6 0.6% 2019/20 18.9 2.8 0.7% 2020/21 17.4 2.8 0.6% Sources: Budget speeches for 2020 , 2019 , 2018 , 2017 , 2016 , 2015 and 2014 and Appropriations Acts for 2020, 2019 , 2018 , 2017 , 2016 , 2015 and 2014 . Note: The figures shown have been rounded up. Only once in the last seven financial years, in 2014/15, did the judiciary receive more than 1% of the national budget. We therefore rate this claim as correct. Claim We have an average of 400,000 cases being filed in our courts every year Verdict correct The most recent state of the judiciary report covers the 2018/19 financial year. Released in January 2020, it shows that more than two million cases were lodged in all courts between 2014/15 and 2018/19. The report said : “The number of filed cases provides quantitative information on the extent of demand for court services by the public.” Total number of cases filed in the judiciary Financial year Cases 2014/15 334,685 2015/16 460,961 2016/17 344,180 2017/18 402,243 2018/19 484,349 Average 405,283 The average number of cases filed in the period covered by the report works out to 405,283 a year. We therefore rate this claim as correct. Claim We only dispose of about 300,000 cases Verdict correct Discussing the country’s case backlog, Maraga said the judiciary settles about 300,000 cases every year. This number was determined by the number of judges and magistrates and would only continue to pile up. “Unless the judiciary is given enough resources to have enough manpower, Kenyans will continue crying about delayed cases,” he said . The most recent state of the judiciary report has data covering 2014/15 to 2018/19. It shows an average of 321,652 cases settled across the five financial years. As of 2018/19 there were 153 judges and 546 magistrates in Kenya. Number of cases resolved by the judiciary Financial year Cases 2014/15 272,605 2015/16 191,625 2016/17 304,182 2017/18 370,488 2018/19 469,359 Average 321,652 We therefore rate the claim as correct. Claim In Kenya now with a population of about 48 million, we have one judge serving over 300,000 people Verdict correct There are 47.6 million people in Kenya, according to 2019 census data. The most recent data from the judiciary shows there were 153 judges as of June 2019. This works out to one judge for every 311,000 people. We rate this claim as correct. Claim We have one magistrate serving over 77,000 people Verdict understated The most recent data from the judiciary shows there were 546 magistrates in Kenya as of June 2019. The state of the judiciary report was released in January 2020. Using a population of 47.6 million , this works out to one magistrate for every 87,114 people. The chief justice’s figure was off by over 10,000 but it was still “over 77,000” people per magistrate. We therefore rate it as understated. Claim There is a ‘global average’ for the number of judges and magistrates to number of people Verdict unproven A calculation for a “global average” can be achieved by directly comparing the number of judges and magistrates to the world population. But to account for population differences, rates (per 100,000 people) are widely used . ( Note: See box below for more context. ) The chief justice has in the past spoken of a “recommended global percentage” of funding for the judiciary. We have contacted the judiciary for the source of the "global average" cited by the chief justice and will update this report with their response. Wachira Maina is a constitutional lawyer in Kenya who has written about the progress of institutions, including the judiciary, following the adoption of the 2010 constitution. He directed us to the UN Office of Drug and Crime (UNODC) for data on the administration of justice professionals against a country’s population. It shows there were 1.3 judges or magistrates for every 100,000 people in Kenya in 2014, 3.6 for South Africa in 2015, and 0.8 for the US and 8.7 for China in 2017. But the UNODC noted key weaknesses in the data when comparing countries. “The numbers reported are not restricted to judges deciding criminal cases,” it said. “The comparability problem might get even worse because some countries might still only report the number of judges whose duty is the judgment of criminal cases. “Apart from this, it is not clear whether really all judges are included in the reported figures in all countries.” Without a source for the chief justice’s claim of a global average, we can only rate this final claim as unproven. Is calculating the ratio of judges and magistrates to the population useful? The ratio of judges and magistrates to the population is useful depending on what you’re using it to show, Wachira Maina , a constitutional lawyer in Kenya told Africa Check. He gave an example of using the ratio of the number of doctors to the population as a metric for access to health, and of police officers to measure access to security services. However, he said, ratio data leaves a lot unstated, such as the distribution by region and by urban and rural areas. Therefore “to determine access to services, you will almost certainly need additional information”. “A high ratio by itself does not prove that most people have access to services, merely that if services were equitably distributed, and they rarely are, more people would have access,” Maina said. “Keep in mind though that you cannot increase access unless you have the numbers, so the ratio does still say something useful.” Chris Kerkering is a litigation manager at Katiba Institute , an organisation in Nairobi that promotes the knowledge of Kenya’s constitution. He told Africa Check that population does not automatically equate to a judge’s caseload. A very litigious society would have more cases per population, he said. Caseload and caseload weighting, which Kerkering described as not only counting the number of cases but also being able to determine how much time each respective case would take , may be the best way to determine whether a judiciary has the appropriate number of judges. But since doing a comparison between different countries with different legal systems and different cultures would be near impossible, “judges per population is a decent aggregate”, Kerkering said. He said the chief justice’s focus was on access to justice. “If there are not enough judges and the staff that support them then they are unable to provide the services that the judiciary requires. Case backlogs become one of the more obvious problems. Fewer judges mean that each judge is taking more cases.” “The more cases a judge has, the more time it takes to get through them. Access to justice requires timely decisions. The phrase ‘justice delayed is justice denied,’ is so commonly used for a reason. Often, as a case winds its way through the court system, avoidable delays result in long term harm.” “A judiciary that can’t get through its caseload promptly can’t ensure access to justice as required by the constitution.” Carlos Mureithi is a journalist based in Nairobi, Kenya Further reading: https://africacheck.org/reports/budget-cuts-hit-kenyas-judiciary-but-theres-no-global-funding-target/ Republish our content for free We believe that everyone needs the facts. You can republish the text of this article free of charge, both online and in print. However, we ask that you pay attention to these simple guidelines . In a nutshell: 1. Do not include images, as in most cases we do not own the copyright. 2. Please do not edit the article. 3. Make sure you credit "Africa Check" in the byline and don't forget to mention that the article was originally published on africacheck.org . Name Surname Email Leave this field blank Carlos Mureithi Claim Six claims about the Kenyan judiciary, from its budget and number of cases to how many judges and magistrates serve Kenya’s population. Verdict Four correct, one understated and one unproven Source Kenya’s chief justice, David Maraga (August 2020) Join us on WhatsApp Further Reading false Nigeria Trump USAid funding No, Trump cut USAid funding to Nigeria – and elsewhere – because of US interests, not because of corrupt Nigerian politicians false South Africa HIV HIV/AIDS United States funding government false claim No, 100% of South Africa’s HIV/Aids funding does not come from the United States – mostly funded by the South African government Nigeria budget debt policing Osita Chidoka aviation minister Fact-checking former minister Osita Chidoka's claims on Nigeria's 2025 budget, debt and policing Add new comment Your name Comment About text formats Restricted HTML Allowed HTML tags: <a href hreflang> <em> <strong> <cite> <blockquote cite> <code> <ul type> <ol start type> <li> <dl> <dt> <dd> <h2 id> <h3 id> <h4 id> <h5 id> <h6 id> Lines and paragraphs break automatically. Web page addresses and email addresses turn into links automatically. limit: 600 characters Leave this field blank Sign up to our newsletter Name Africa Check values your trust and is committed to the responsible management, use and protection of personal information. See our privacy policy. Leave this field blank Spot Checks View All false Nigeria Trump USAid funding No, Trump cut USAid funding to Nigeria – and elsewhere – because of US interests, not because of corrupt Nigerian politicians false South Africa HIV HIV/AIDS United States funding government false claim No, 100% of South Africa’s HIV/Aids funding does not come from the United States – mostly funded by the South African government Nigeria budget debt policing Osita Chidoka aviation minister Fact-checking former minister Osita Chidoka's claims on Nigeria's 2025 budget, debt and policing We hold public figures accountable For democracy to function, public figures need to be held to account for what they say. The claims they make need to be checked, openly and impartially. Africa Check is an independent, non-partisan organisation which assesses claims made in the public arena using journalistic skills and evidence drawn from the latest online tools, readers, public sources and experts, sorting fact from fiction and publishing the results. Browse by category Health Covid-19 Education Crime Economy Kenya Nigeria Senegal South Africa Sign up to our newsletter Name Africa Check values your trust and is committed to the responsible management, use and protection of personal information. See our privacy policy. Leave this field blank Follow us Facebook Twitter Instagram TikTok Footer About Partner With Us Terms and Conditions Contact Us Sitemap Want to keep reading our fact-checks? We will never charge you for verified, reliable information. Help us keep it that way by supporting our work. Become a newsletter subscriber Name Africa Check values your trust and is committed to the responsible management, use and protection of personal information. See our privacy policy. Leave this field blank Support independent fact-checking in Africa. See our donation optionsFactchecking Kenya’s chief justice on judiciary funding and backlog of cases - Africa Check Skip to main content English Français Main navigation Fact-checks Reports Factsheets Guides Spot Checks Blog Meta programme fact-checks Republish our work Who we are Our team Our impact How we are funded Partners Get in touch What we do Info Finder African Fact-Checking Awards Corrections Fact-checking research Training Media Literacy Educator knowledge hub How we fact-check Corrections policy Code of principles How we rate claims Get Involved Donate Submit a claim to fact-check Partner with us Join our team Fact-checking tips Quizzes Donate Back to Africa Check Factchecking Kenya’s chief justice on judiciary funding and backlog of cases Published on 17 September 2020 Claim Six claims about the Kenyan judiciary, from its budget and number of cases to how many judges and magistrates serve Kenya’s population. Verdict Four correct, one understated and one unproven Source Kenya’s chief justice, David Maraga (August 2020) This article is more than 4 years old Maraga was largely correct about the judiciary budget and how many Kenyans are served per judge and magistrate in the country. The chief justice was also correct that the number of cases filed in Kenyan courts every year exceeds the number of cases the judiciary settles by as much as 100,000, causing an ever-growing backlog. But there isn’t evidence of a global average for comparing the number of judges and magistrates per population – there are too many variables in different legal systems. To mark the tenth anniversary of Kenya’s constitution , broadcaster NTV interviewed current and former government officials on how the law has been applied. Chief justice David Maraga told NTV that while the 2010 constitution had sought to strengthen the judiciary’s independence, funding was a perennial headache. “[Budget cuts] hit the judiciary sometimes to a point that its operations grind to a halt,” Maraga said in the interview , published in August 2020. In recent months the chief justice has been vocal on how cuts have hampered the delivery of judicial services. In his interview, Maraga made several claims. We looked into their accuracy. Claim The judiciary does not even get 1% of the national budget Verdict correct Maraga, who assumed office in 2016, asked for more funding as “the judiciary does not even get 1% of the national budget”. “We have said, over and over again, that for the judiciary to operate properly we should get at least 2.5% of the national budget,” he said . Africa Check has previously found there isn’t a “recommended global percentage” of funding for the judiciary from the national budget. In 2018 Maraga also claimed it was 2.5%. To determine how much has been allocated to the judiciary in recent years we consulted the appropriation acts, the laws that show budget allocations to government departments. For the national budget, we checked budget statements. Judiciary amounts as share of Kenya budget Year Judiciary budget (KSh billion) National budget (KSh trillion) Share 2014/15 17.5 1.58 1.1% 2015/16 16.7 2 0.8% 2016/17 17.3 2.3 0.8% 2017/18 17.6 2.3 0.8% 2018/19 14.5 2.6 0.6% 2019/20 18.9 2.8 0.7% 2020/21 17.4 2.8 0.6% Sources: Budget speeches for 2020 , 2019 , 2018 , 2017 , 2016 , 2015 and 2014 and Appropriations Acts for 2020, 2019 , 2018 , 2017 , 2016 , 2015 and 2014 . Note: The figures shown have been rounded up. Only once in the last seven financial years, in 2014/15, did the judiciary receive more than 1% of the national budget. We therefore rate this claim as correct. Claim We have an average of 400,000 cases being filed in our courts every year Verdict correct The most recent state of the judiciary report covers the 2018/19 financial year. Released in January 2020, it shows that more than two million cases were lodged in all courts between 2014/15 and 2018/19. The report said : “The number of filed cases provides quantitative information on the extent of demand for court services by the public.” Total number of cases filed in the judiciary Financial year Cases 2014/15 334,685 2015/16 460,961 2016/17 344,180 2017/18 402,243 2018/19 484,349 Average 405,283 The average number of cases filed in the period covered by the report works out to 405,283 a year. We therefore rate this claim as correct. Claim We only dispose of about 300,000 cases Verdict correct Discussing the country’s case backlog, Maraga said the judiciary settles about 300,000 cases every year. This number was determined by the number of judges and magistrates and would only continue to pile up. “Unless the judiciary is given enough resources to have enough manpower, Kenyans will continue crying about delayed cases,” he said . The most recent state of the judiciary report has data covering 2014/15 to 2018/19. It shows an average of 321,652 cases settled across the five financial years. As of 2018/19 there were 153 judges and 546 magistrates in Kenya. Number of cases resolved by the judiciary Financial year Cases 2014/15 272,605 2015/16 191,625 2016/17 304,182 2017/18 370,488 2018/19 469,359 Average 321,652 We therefore rate the claim as correct. Claim In Kenya now with a population of about 48 million, we have one judge serving over 300,000 people Verdict correct There are 47.6 million people in Kenya, according to 2019 census data. The most recent data from the judiciary shows there were 153 judges as of June 2019. This works out to one judge for every 311,000 people. We rate this claim as correct. Claim We have one magistrate serving over 77,000 people Verdict understated The most recent data from the judiciary shows there were 546 magistrates in Kenya as of June 2019. The state of the judiciary report was released in January 2020. Using a population of 47.6 million , this works out to one magistrate for every 87,114 people. The chief justice’s figure was off by over 10,000 but it was still “over 77,000” people per magistrate. We therefore rate it as understated. Claim There is a ‘global average’ for the number of judges and magistrates to number of people Verdict unproven A calculation for a “global average” can be achieved by directly comparing the number of judges and magistrates to the world population. But to account for population differences, rates (per 100,000 people) are widely used . ( Note: See box below for more context. ) The chief justice has in the past spoken of a “recommended global percentage” of funding for the judiciary. We have contacted the judiciary for the source of the "global average" cited by the chief justice and will update this report with their response. Wachira Maina is a constitutional lawyer in Kenya who has written about the progress of institutions, including the judiciary, following the adoption of the 2010 constitution. He directed us to the UN Office of Drug and Crime (UNODC) for data on the administration of justice professionals against a country’s population. It shows there were 1.3 judges or magistrates for every 100,000 people in Kenya in 2014, 3.6 for South Africa in 2015, and 0.8 for the US and 8.7 for China in 2017. But the UNODC noted key weaknesses in the data when comparing countries. “The numbers reported are not restricted to judges deciding criminal cases,” it said. “The comparability problem might get even worse because some countries might still only report the number of judges whose duty is the judgment of criminal cases. “Apart from this, it is not clear whether really all judges are included in the reported figures in all countries.” Without a source for the chief justice’s claim of a global average, we can only rate this final claim as unproven. Is calculating the ratio of judges and magistrates to the population useful? The ratio of judges and magistrates to the population is useful depending on what you’re using it to show, Wachira Maina , a constitutional lawyer in Kenya told Africa Check. He gave an example of using the ratio of the number of doctors to the population as a metric for access to health, and of police officers to measure access to security services. However, he said, ratio data leaves a lot unstated, such as the distribution by region and by urban and rural areas. Therefore “to determine access to services, you will almost certainly need additional information”. “A high ratio by itself does not prove that most people have access to services, merely that if services were equitably distributed, and they rarely are, more people would have access,” Maina said. “Keep in mind though that you cannot increase access unless you have the numbers, so the ratio does still say something useful.” Chris Kerkering is a litigation manager at Katiba Institute , an organisation in Nairobi that promotes the knowledge of Kenya’s constitution. He told Africa Check that population does not automatically equate to a judge’s caseload. A very litigious society would have more cases per population, he said. Caseload and caseload weighting, which Kerkering described as not only counting the number of cases but also being able to determine how much time each respective case would take , may be the best way to determine whether a judiciary has the appropriate number of judges. But since doing a comparison between different countries with different legal systems and different cultures would be near impossible, “judges per population is a decent aggregate”, Kerkering said. He said the chief justice’s focus was on access to justice. “If there are not enough judges and the staff that support them then they are unable to provide the services that the judiciary requires. Case backlogs become one of the more obvious problems. Fewer judges mean that each judge is taking more cases.” “The more cases a judge has, the more time it takes to get through them. Access to justice requires timely decisions. The phrase ‘justice delayed is justice denied,’ is so commonly used for a reason. Often, as a case winds its way through the court system, avoidable delays result in long term harm.” “A judiciary that can’t get through its caseload promptly can’t ensure access to justice as required by the constitution.” Carlos Mureithi is a journalist based in Nairobi, Kenya Further reading: https://africacheck.org/reports/budget-cuts-hit-kenyas-judiciary-but-theres-no-global-funding-target/ Republish our content for free We believe that everyone needs the facts. You can republish the text of this article free of charge, both online and in print. However, we ask that you pay attention to these simple guidelines . In a nutshell: 1. Do not include images, as in most cases we do not own the copyright. 2. Please do not edit the article. 3. Make sure you credit "Africa Check" in the byline and don't forget to mention that the article was originally published on africacheck.org . Name Surname Email Leave this field blank Carlos Mureithi Claim Six claims about the Kenyan judiciary, from its budget and number of cases to how many judges and magistrates serve Kenya’s population. Verdict Four correct, one understated and one unproven Source Kenya’s chief justice, David Maraga (August 2020) Join us on WhatsApp Further Reading false Nigeria Trump USAid funding No, Trump cut USAid funding to Nigeria – and elsewhere – because of US interests, not because of corrupt Nigerian politicians false South Africa HIV HIV/AIDS United States funding government false claim No, 100% of South Africa’s HIV/Aids funding does not come from the United States – mostly funded by the South African government Nigeria budget debt policing Osita Chidoka aviation minister Fact-checking former minister Osita Chidoka's claims on Nigeria's 2025 budget, debt and policing Add new comment Your name Comment About text formats Restricted HTML Allowed HTML tags: <a href hreflang> <em> <strong> <cite> <blockquote cite> <code> <ul type> <ol start type> <li> <dl> <dt> <dd> <h2 id> <h3 id> <h4 id> <h5 id> <h6 id> Lines and paragraphs break automatically. Web page addresses and email addresses turn into links automatically. limit: 600 characters Leave this field blank Sign up to our newsletter Name Africa Check values your trust and is committed to the responsible management, use and protection of personal information. See our privacy policy. Leave this field blank Spot Checks View All false Nigeria Trump USAid funding No, Trump cut USAid funding to Nigeria – and elsewhere – because of US interests, not because of corrupt Nigerian politicians false South Africa HIV HIV/AIDS United States funding government false claim No, 100% of South Africa’s HIV/Aids funding does not come from the United States – mostly funded by the South African government Nigeria budget debt policing Osita Chidoka aviation minister Fact-checking former minister Osita Chidoka's claims on Nigeria's 2025 budget, debt and policing We hold public figures accountable For democracy to function, public figures need to be held to account for what they say. The claims they make need to be checked, openly and impartially. Africa Check is an independent, non-partisan organisation which assesses claims made in the public arena using journalistic skills and evidence drawn from the latest online tools, readers, public sources and experts, sorting fact from fiction and publishing the results. Browse by category Health Covid-19 Education Crime Economy Kenya Nigeria Senegal South Africa Sign up to our newsletter Name Africa Check values your trust and is committed to the responsible management, use and protection of personal information. See our privacy policy. Leave this field blank Follow us Facebook Twitter Instagram TikTok Footer About Partner With Us Terms and Conditions Contact Us Sitemap Want to keep reading our fact-checks? We will never charge you for verified, reliable information. Help us keep it that way by supporting our work. Become a newsletter subscriber Name Africa Check values your trust and is committed to the responsible management, use and protection of personal information. See our privacy policy. Leave this field blank Support independent fact-checking in Africa. See our donation optionsKenya - Wikipedia Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Etymology 2 History Toggle History subsection 2.1 Prehistory 2.2 Swahili trade period 2.3 Early Portuguese presence 2.4 18th and 19th centuries 2.5 German Protectorate (1885–1890) 2.6 British Kenya (1888–1962) 2.7 Mau Mau Uprising 2.8 Somalis of Kenya referendum, 1962 2.9 Early independence period 2.10 First presidency 2.11 Moi era 2.12 Transition to multiparty democracy 2.13 President Kibaki and the road to a new constitution 2.14 Kenyatta and Ruto presidencies 3 Geography Toggle Geography subsection 3.1 Climate 3.2 Wildlife 4 Government and politics Toggle Government and politics subsection 4.1 2013 elections and new government 4.2 Foreign relations 4.3 Armed forces 4.4 Administrative divisions 4.5 Human rights 5 Economy Toggle Economy subsection 5.1 Tourism 5.2 Agriculture 5.3 Industry and manufacturing 5.4 Transport 5.5 Energy 5.6 Chinese investment and trade 5.7 Vision 2030 5.8 Oil exploration 5.9 Action against pollution 5.10 Labour and human capital 5.11 Microfinance 6 Demographics Toggle Demographics subsection 6.1 Ethnic groups 6.2 Languages 6.3 Urban centres 6.4 Religion 6.5 Health 6.6 Women 6.7 Youth 6.8 Education 7 Culture Toggle Culture subsection 7.1 Literature 7.2 Music 7.3 Sports 7.4 Cuisine 8 See also 9 Notes 10 References 11 Sources and further reading 12 External links Toggle the table of contents Kenya 267 languages Acèh Адыгабзэ Afrikaans Alemannisch አማርኛ Anarâškielâ अंगिका Ænglisc Аԥсшәа العربية Aragonés Արեւմտահայերէն Arpetan অসমীয়া Asturianu अवधी Avañe'ẽ Aymar aru Azərbaycanca تۆرکجه Basa Bali Bamanankan বাংলা Banjar 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gú Basa Banyumasan Башҡортса Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) भोजपुरी Bikol Central Bislama Български Boarisch བོད་ཡིག Bosanski Brezhoneg Буряад Català Чӑвашла Cebuano Čeština Chavacano de Zamboanga ChiShona ChiTumbuka Corsu Cymraeg Dagbanli Dansk الدارجة Davvisámegiella Deutsch ދިވެހިބަސް Diné bizaad Dolnoserbski डोटेली ཇོང་ཁ Eesti Ελληνικά Эрзянь Español Esperanto Estremeñu Euskara Eʋegbe Farefare فارسی Fiji Hindi Føroyskt Français Frysk Fulfulde Gaeilge Gaelg Gagauz Gàidhlig Galego Gĩkũyũ ગુજરાતી गोंयची कोंकणी / Gõychi Konknni 客家語 / Hak-kâ-ngî 한국어 Hausa Hawaiʻi Հայերեն हिन्दी Hornjoserbsce Hrvatski Ido Igbo Ilokano বিষ্ণুপ্রিয়া মণিপুরী Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua Interlingue Ирон IsiZulu Íslenska Italiano עברית Jawa Kabɩyɛ ಕನ್ನಡ Kapampangan ქართული कॉशुर / کٲشُر Kaszëbsczi Қазақша Kernowek Ikinyarwanda Ikirundi Kiswahili Kongo Kotava Kreyòl ayisyen Kriyòl gwiyannen Kurdî Кыргызча Кырык мары Ladin Ladino Latgaļu Latina Latviešu Lëtzebuergesch Лезги Lietuvių Ligure Limburgs Lingála Lingua Franca Nova Livvinkarjala La .lojban. Luganda Lombard Magyar Madhurâ मैथिली Македонски Malagasy മലയാളം Malti Māori मराठी მარგალური مصرى مازِرونی Bahasa Melayu ꯃꯤꯇꯩ ꯂꯣꯟ Minangkabau 閩東語 / Mìng-dĕ̤ng-ngṳ̄ Mirandés Мокшень Монгол မြန်မာဘာသာ Naijá Nederlands Nedersaksies नेपाली नेपाल भाषा 日本語 Napulitano Нохчийн Nordfriisk Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Novial Occitan ଓଡ଼ିଆ Oromoo Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча ਪੰਜਾਬੀ पालि Pangasinan Pangcah پنجابی ပအိုဝ်ႏဘာႏသာႏ Papiamentu پښتو Patois ភាសាខ្មែរ Piemontèis Tok Pisin Plattdüütsch Polski Português Qaraqalpaqsha Qırımtatarca Română Runa Simi Русиньскый Русский Саха тыла Sakizaya Gagana Samoa संस्कृतम् Sängö ᱥᱟᱱᱛᱟᱲᱤ Sardu Scots Seediq Seeltersk Sesotho Sesotho sa Leboa Setswana Shqip Sicilianu සිංහල Simple English سنڌي SiSwati Slovenčina Slovenščina Ślůnski Soomaaliga کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Sunda Suomi Svenska Tagalog தமிழ் Taqbaylit Татарча / tatarça တႆး Tayal తెలుగు ไทย Thuɔŋjäŋ ትግርኛ Тоҷикӣ Türkçe Türkmençe Tyap Удмурт Українська اردو ئۇيغۇرچە / Uyghurche Vahcuengh Vèneto Vepsän kel’ Tiếng Việt Volapük Võro 文言 Winaray Wolof 吴语 Xitsonga ייִדיש Yorùbá 粵語 Zazaki Zeêuws Žemaitėška 中文 Obolo Betawi Fɔ̀ngbè Ghanaian Pidgin Kumoring Yerwa Kanuri Moore IsiNdebele seSewula Tolışi ⵜⴰⵎⴰⵣⵉⵖⵜ ⵜⴰⵏⴰⵡⴰⵢⵜ Edit links Article Talk English Read View source View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read View source View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikinews Wikiquote Wikivoyage Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Coordinates : 1°N 38°E ﻿ / ﻿ 1°N 38°E ﻿ / 1; 38 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Country in East Africa This article is about the country. For other uses, see Kenya (disambiguation) . Republic of Kenya Jamhuri ya Kenya ( Swahili ) Flag Coat of arms Motto: " Harambee " (English: "Let us all pull together" ) Anthem: " Ee Mungu Nguvu Yetu " (English: "O God of All Creation" ) Show globe Show map of Africa Capital and largest city Nairobi 1°16′S 36°48′E ﻿ / ﻿ 1.267°S 36.800°E ﻿ / -1.267; 36.800 Official languages Swahili English [ 1 ] National language Swahili [ 1 ] Ethnic groups (2019 census) [ 2 ] 17.13% Kikuyu 14.35% Luhya 13.37% Kalenjin 10.65% Luo 9.81% Kamba 5.85% Somali 5.68% Kisii 5.23% Mijikenda 4.15% Meru 13.78% others Religion (2019 census) [ 2 ] [ 3 ] 85.5% Christianity 10.9% Islam 1.5% no religion 0.7% traditional faiths 1.3% others Demonym(s) Kenyan Government Unitary presidential republic • President William Ruto • Deputy President Kithure Kindiki • Senate Speaker Amason Kingi • Assembly Speaker Moses Wetangula • Chief Justice Martha Koome Legislature Parliament • Upper house Senate • Lower house National Assembly Independence from the United Kingdom • Kilwa Sultanate 957–1513 • Omani control of Swahili coast 1698–1887 • Dominion 12 December 1963 • Republic 12 December 1964 • Current Constitution 27 August 2010 Area • Total 580,367 km 2 (224,081 sq mi) [ 4 ] [ 5 ] ( 48th ) • Water (%) 2.3 Population • 2024 estimate 52,428,290 [ 6 ] ( 28th ) • 2019 census 47,564,296 [ 7 ] • Density 82/km 2 (212.4/sq mi) ( 124th ) GDP ( PPP ) 2025 estimate • Total $401.97 billion [ 8 ] ( 59th ) • Per capita $7,530 [ 8 ] ( 142nd ) GDP (nominal) 2025 estimate • Total $131.67 billion [ 8 ] ( 59th ) • Per capita $2,470 [ 8 ] ( 150th ) Gini (2021) 38.7 [ 9 ] medium inequality HDI (2023) 0.628 [ 10 ] medium ( 143rd ) Currency Kenyan shilling ( KES ) Time zone UTC +3 ( East Africa Time ) Date format dd/mm/yy ( AD ) Calling code +254 ISO 3166 code KE Internet TLD .ke According to the CIA, estimates for this country explicitly take into account the effects of mortality because of AIDS; this can result in lower life expectancy, higher infant mortality and death rates, lower population and growth rates, and changes in the distribution of population by age and sex, than would otherwise be expected. [ 11 ] Kenya , [ a ] officially the Republic of Kenya , [ b ] is a country located in East Africa . With an estimated population of more than 52.4 million as of mid-2024, [ 13 ] Kenya is the 27th-most-populous country in the world [ 7 ] and the 7th most populous in Africa. Kenya's capital and largest city is Nairobi . Its second-largest and oldest city is Mombasa , a major port city located on Mombasa Island . Other major cities within the country include Kisumu , Nakuru & Eldoret .Going clockwise, Kenya is bordered by South Sudan to the northwest (though much of that border includes the disputed Ilemi Triangle ), Ethiopia to the north, Somalia to the east, the Indian Ocean to the southeast, Tanzania to the southwest, and Lake Victoria and Uganda to the west. Kenya's geography , climate and population vary widely. In western, rift valley counties, the landscape includes cold, snow-capped mountaintops (such as Batian, Nelion and Point Lenana on Mount Kenya ) with vast surrounding forests, wildlife and fertile agricultural regions to temperate climates. In other areas, there are dry, arid and semi-arid climates as well as absolute deserts (such as Chalbi Desert and Nyiri Desert ). Kenya's earliest inhabitants were hunter-gatherers , such as the present-day Hadza people . [ 14 ] [ 15 ] According to archaeological dating of associated artifacts and skeletal material, Cushitic speakers first settled in the region's lowlands between 3,200 and 1,300 BC, a phase known as the Lowland Savanna Pastoral Neolithic . Nilotic -speaking pastoralists (ancestral to Kenya's Nilotic speakers) began migrating from present-day South Sudan into Kenya around 500 BC. [ 16 ] Bantu people settled at the coast and the interior between 250 BC and 500 AD. [ 17 ] European contact began in 1500 AD with the Portuguese Empire , and effective colonisation of Kenya began in the 19th century during the European exploration of Africa . Modern-day Kenya emerged from a protectorate established by the British Empire in 1895 and the subsequent Kenya Colony , which began in 1920. Mombasa was the capital of the British East Africa Protectorate , [ 18 ] which included most of what is now Kenya and southwestern Somalia, from 1889 to 1907. Numerous disputes between the UK and the colony led to the Mau Mau revolution , which began in 1952, and the Kenya's declaration of independence in 1963. After independence, Kenya remained a member of the Commonwealth of Nations . The country's current constitution was adopted in 2010, replacing the previous 1963 constitution . Kenya is a presidential representative democratic republic, in which elected officials represent the people and the president is the head of state and government. [ 19 ] The country is a member of the United Nations , the Commonwealth , World Bank , International Monetary Fund , World Trade Organization , COMESA , International Criminal Court , as well as several other international organisations. It is also a major non-NATO ally of the United States . Kenya's economy is the largest in east and central Africa, with Nairobi serving as a major regional commercial hub. [ 20 ] With a Gross National Income of $2,110, [ 21 ] the country is a lower-middle-income economy. Agriculture is the country's largest economic sector; tea and coffee are the sector's traditional cash crops, while fresh flowers are a fast-growing export. The service industry , particularly tourism, is also one of the country's major economic drivers. Kenya is a member of the East African Community trade bloc, [ 22 ] [ 23 ] though some international trade organisations categorise it as part of the Greater Horn of Africa . [ 24 ] Africa is Kenya's largest export market, followed by the European Union. [ 25 ] Etymology The Republic of Kenya is named after Mount Kenya . The earliest recorded version of the modern name was written by German explorer Johann Ludwig Krapf in the 19th century. While travelling with a Kamba caravan led by the long-distance trader Chief Kivoi , Krapf spotted the mountain peak and asked what it was called. Kivoi told him " Kĩ-Nyaa " or " Kĩlĩma- Kĩinyaa ", probably because the pattern of black rock and white snow on its peaks reminded him of the feathers of the male ostrich. [ 26 ] In archaic Kikuyu , the word 'nyaga' or more commonly 'manyaganyaga' is used to describe an extremely bright object. The Agikuyu, who inhabit the slopes of Mt. Kenya, call it Kĩrĩma Kĩrĩnyaga (literally 'the mountain with brightness') in Kikuyu , while the Embu call it "Kirinyaa". All three names have the same meaning. [ 27 ] Ludwig Krapf recorded the name as both Kenia and Kegnia . [ 28 ] [ 29 ] [ 30 ] Some have said that this was a precise notation of the African pronunciation / ˈ k ɛ n j ə / . [ 31 ] An 1882 map drawn by Joseph Thompsons, a Scottish geologist and naturalist, indicated Mt. Kenya as Mt. Kenia. [ 26 ] The mountain's name was accepted, pars pro toto , as the name of the country. It did not come into widespread official use during the early colonial period, when the country was referred to as the East African Protectorate . The official name was changed to the Colony of Kenya in 1920. History Main article: History of Kenya For a chronological guide, see Timeline of Kenya . Prehistory Turkana Boy , a 1.6-million-year-old Homo erectus fossil Hominid species, such as Homo habilis (fl. 1.8 to 2.5 million years ago) and Homo erectus (fl. 1.9 million to 350,000 years ago), possibly the direct ancestors of modern Homo sapiens , had lived in Kenya in the Pleistocene epoch. [ 32 ] East Africa, including Kenya, is one of the earliest regions where modern humans ( Homo sapiens ) are believed to have lived. In 1984, during excavations at Lake Turkana palaeoanthropologist Richard Leakey , assisted by Kamoya Kimeu , had discovered the Turkana Boy , a 1.6-million-year-old Homo erectus fossil. Further evidence of Kenya's prehistory was found in 2018, namely the early emergence of modern behaviours , including long-distance trade networks (involving goods such as obsidian ), the use of pigments, and possibly the making of projectile points , about 320,000 years ago. The authors of three 2018 studies on the site suggest that complex and modern behaviours had already begun in Africa around the time of the emergence of Homo sapiens . [ 33 ] [ 34 ] [ 35 ] The first inhabitants of present-day Kenya were hunter-gatherer groups, akin to the modern Khoisan speakers. [ 36 ] These people were later largely replaced by agropastoralist Cushitic (ancestral to Kenya's Cushitic speakers), who originated from the Horn of Africa . [ 37 ] During the early Holocene , the region's climate shifted from drier to wetter conditions. This provided an opportunity for the development of cultural traditions such as agriculture and herding in a more favourable environment. [ 36 ] Around 500 BC, Nilotic -speaking pastoralists (ancestral to Kenya's present-day Nilotic speakers) started migrating from what is now southern Sudan into Kenya. [ 16 ] [ 38 ] [ 39 ] Today, the country's Nilotic ethnic groups include the Kalenjin , Samburu , Luo , Turkana , and Maasai . [ 40 ] By the first millennium AD, Bantu -speaking farmers had moved into the region, initially along the Kenyan coast . [ 41 ] The Bantus had originated in West Africa along the Benue River in what is now eastern Nigeria and western Cameroon . [ 42 ] The Bantu migration brought new developments in agriculture and ironworking to the region. [ 42 ] Today, the country's Bantu groups include the Kikuyu , Luhya , Kamba , Kisii , Meru , Kuria , Aembu , Ambeere , Wadawida -Watuweta, Wapokomo, and Mijikenda , among many others. Notable prehistoric sites in the interior of Kenya include the (possibly archaeoastronomical) site Namoratunga on the west side of Lake Turkana and the walled settlement of Thimlich Ohinga in Migori County . Swahili trade period Further information: Swahili culture and Sultanate of Zanzibar A traditional Swahili carved wooden door in Lamu The coastline of Kenya was home to communities of ironworkers and Bantu subsistence farmers, hunters, and fishers who supported the region's economy with agriculture, fishing, metal production, and trade with foreign countries. These communities formed the earliest city-states in the region, which were collectively known as Azania . [ 43 ] The Swahili people were of mixed African and Asian (particularly Persian) ancestry, as DNA evidence has revealed. [ 44 ] By the 1st century CE, many of the area's city-states, such as Mombasa , Malindi , and Zanzibar , began to establish trading relations with the Arabs . This led to increased economic growth of the Swahili states, the introduction of Islam , Arabic influences on the Swahili language , cultural diffusion , as well as the Swahili city-states becoming members of a larger trade network. [ 45 ] [ 46 ] Many historians had long believed that the city-states were established by Arab or Persian traders, but archaeological evidence has led scholars to recognise the city-states as an indigenous development which, though subjected to foreign influence due to trade, retained a Bantu cultural core. [ 47 ] The Kilwa Sultanate was a medieval sultanate centred at Kilwa , in modern-day Tanzania. At its height, its authority stretched over the entire length of the Swahili Coast , including Kenya. [ 48 ] Beginning in the 10th century, the rulers of Kilwa would go on to build elaborate coral mosques and introduce copper coinage. [ 49 ] Swahili, a Bantu language with Arabic , Persian , and other Middle-Eastern and South Asian loanwords , later developed as a lingua franca for trade between the different peoples. [ 43 ] Since the turn of the 20th century, Swahili has also adopted numerous loanwords and calques from English, many of which originated during the era of British colonial rule. [ 50 ] Early Portuguese presence Portuguese presence in Kenya lasted from 1498 until 1730. Mombasa was under Portuguese rule from 1593 to 1698 and again from 1728 to 1729. The Swahili built Mombasa into a major port city and established trade links with other nearby city-states, as well as commercial centres in Persia, Arabia, and even India. [ 51 ] By the 15th century, Portuguese voyager Duarte Barbosa wrote that "Mombasa is a place of great traffic and has a good harbour in which there are always moored small craft of many kinds and also great ships, both of which are bound from Sofala and others which come from Cambay and Melinde and others which sail to the island of Zanzibar." [ 52 ] One major city on the Kenyan coast is Malindi. It has been an important Swahili settlement since the 14th century, and the city once rivalled Mombasa for dominance in the African Great Lakes region. Malindi has traditionally been a friendly port city for foreign powers. In 1414, the Chinese trader and explorer Zheng He , representing the Ming Dynasty , visited the East African coast on one of his last ' treasure voyages '. [ 53 ] Malindi also welcomed the Portuguese explorer Vasco da Gama in 1498. In the 17th century, the Swahili coast was conquered by the Omani Arabs , who expanded the slave trade to meet the demands of plantations in Oman and Zanzibar. [ 54 ] Initially, these traders came mainly from Oman, but later many came from Zanzibar (such as Tippu Tip ). [ 55 ] In addition, the Portuguese started buying slaves from the Omani and Zanzibari traders in response to the interruption of the transatlantic slave trade by British abolitionists. 18th and 19th centuries During the 18th and 19th century, the Masai people moved into the central and southern Rift Valley plains of Kenya, from a region north of Lake Rudolf (now Lake Turkana ). Although there weren't many of them, they managed to conquer a great amount of land in the plains, where people did not put up much resistance. [ citation needed ] The Nandi peoples managed to oppose the Masai, while the Taveta peoples fled to the forests on the eastern edge of Mount Kilimanjaro , although they later were forced to leave the land due to the threat of smallpox . An outbreak of either rinderpest or pleuropneumonia greatly affected the Masai's cattle, while an epidemic of smallpox affected the Masai themselves. After the death of the Masai Mbatian , the chief laibon (medicine man), the Masai split into warring factions. The Masai caused much strife in the areas they conquered; however, cooperation between such groups as the Luo people , Luhya people , and Gusii people is evidenced by shared vocabulary for modern implements and similar economic regimes. [ 56 ] Although Arab traders remained in the area, trade routes were disrupted by the hostile Masai, though there was trade in ivory between these factions. [ 57 ] The first foreigners to successfully get past the Masai were Johann Ludwig Krapf and Johannes Rebmann , two German missionaries who established a mission in Rabai , not too far from Mombasa . The pair were the first Europeans to sight Mount Kenya . [ 58 ] German Protectorate (1885–1890) The German Empire established a protectorate over the Sultan of Zanzibar 's coastal possessions in 1885, followed by the arrival of the Imperial British East Africa Company in 1888. Imperial rivalry was prevented by the Heligoland–Zanzibar Treaty , so Germany handed its East African coastal holdings to Britain in 1890. British Kenya (1888–1962) Main article: Kenya Colony British East Africa in 1909 The transfer by Germany to Britain was followed by the building of the Uganda Railway passing through the country. [ 59 ] The building of the railway was resisted by some ethnic groups—notably the Nandi , led by Orkoiyot Koitalel Arap Samoei from 1890 to 1900—but the British eventually built it. The Nandi were the first ethnic group to be put in a native reserve to stop them from disrupting the building of the railway. [ 59 ] During the railway construction era, there was a significant influx of Indian workers, who provided the bulk of the skilled labour required for construction. [ 60 ] They and most of their descendants later remained in Kenya and formed the core of several distinct Indian communities, such as the Ismaili Muslim and Sikh communities. While building the railway through Tsavo , a number of the Indian railway workers and local African labourers were attacked by two lions known as the Tsavo maneaters . [ 61 ] At the outbreak of World War I in August 1914, the governors of British East Africa (as the protectorate was generally known) and German East Africa initially agreed on a truce in an attempt to keep the young colonies out of direct hostilities. But Lieutenant Colonel Paul von Lettow-Vorbeck , the German military commander, determined to tie down as many British resources as possible. Completely cut off from Germany, Lettow-Vorbeck conducted an effective guerrilla warfare campaign , living off the land, capturing British supplies, and remaining undefeated. He eventually surrendered in Northern Rhodesia (today Zambia) 14 days after the Armistice was signed in 1918. [ 60 ] The Kenya–Uganda Railway near Mombasa , about 1899 To chase von Lettow, the British deployed the British Indian Army troops from India but needed large numbers of porters to overcome the formidable logistics of transporting supplies far into the interior on foot. The Carrier Corps was formed and ultimately mobilised over 400,000 Africans, contributing to their long-term politicisation. [ 60 ] In 1920, the East Africa Protectorate was turned into a colony and renamed Kenya after its highest mountain. [ 59 ] During the early part of the 20th century, the interior central highlands were settled by British and other European farmers, who became wealthy farming coffee and tea. [ 62 ] One depiction of this period of change from a colonist's perspective is found in the memoir Out of Africa by Danish author Baroness Karen von Blixen-Finecke, published in 1937. By the 1930s, approximately 30,000 white settlers lived in the area and gained a political voice because of their contribution to the market economy. [ 60 ] The central highlands were already home to over a million members of the Kikuyu people, most of whom had no land claims in European terms and lived as itinerant farmers. To protect their interests, the settlers banned the growing of coffee and introduced a hut tax, and the landless were granted less and less land in exchange for their labour. A massive exodus to the cities ensued as their ability to make a living from the land dwindled. [ 60 ] By the 1950s, there were 80,000 white settlers living in Kenya. [ 63 ] Throughout World War II , Kenya was an important source of manpower and agriculture for the United Kingdom. Kenya itself was the site of fighting between Allied forces and Italian troops in 1940–41, when Italian forces invaded. Wajir and Malindi were bombed as well. Mau Mau Uprising Further information: Mau Mau Uprising A statue of Dedan Kimathi , a Kenyan leader with the Mau Mau who fought against the British colonial system in the 1950s From October 1952 to December 1959, Kenya was in a state of emergency arising from the Mau Mau rebellion against British rule. The Mau Mau, also known as the Kenya Land and Freedom Army, were primarily Kikuyu people. During the colonial administration's crackdown, over 11,000 freedom fighters had been killed, along with 100 British troops and 2,000 Kenyan loyalist soldiers. War crimes were committed on both sides of the conflict, including the publicised Lari massacre and the Hola massacre . The governor requested and obtained British and African troops, including the King's African Rifles . The British began counter-insurgency operations. In May 1953, General Sir George Erskine took charge as commander-in-chief of the colony's armed forces, with the personal backing of Winston Churchill . [ 64 ] The capture of Waruhiu Itote (nom de guerre "General China" ) on 15 January 1954 and the subsequent interrogation led to a better understanding of the Mau Mau command structure for the British. Operation Anvil opened on 24 April 1954, after weeks of planning by the army with the approval of the War Council. The operation effectively placed Nairobi under military siege. Nairobi's occupants were screened and suspected Mau Mau supporters moved to detention camps. More than 80,000 Kikuyu were held in detention camps without trial, often subject to brutal treatment. [ 65 ] The Home Guard formed the core of the government's strategy as it was composed of loyalist Africans, not foreign forces such as the British Army and King's African Rifles. [ 66 ] The capture of Dedan Kimathi on 21 October 1956 in Nyeri signified the ultimate defeat of the Mau Mau and essentially ended the military offensive. [ 64 ] During this period, substantial governmental changes to land tenure occurred. The most important of these was the Swynnerton Plan , which was used to both reward loyalists and punish Mau Mau. This left roughly 1/3rd of Kikuyu bereft of any tenancy land arrangement and thus propertyless at the time of independence. [ 67 ] Somalis of Kenya referendum, 1962 Further information: Somalis in Kenya Before Kenya got its independence, Somali ethnic people in present-day Kenya in the areas of Northern Frontier Districts petitioned Her Majesty's Government not to be included in Kenya. The colonial government decided to hold Kenya's first referendum in 1962 to check the willingness of Somalis in Kenya to join Somalia . [ 68 ] The result of the referendum showed that 86% of Somalis in Kenya wanted to join Somalia , yet the British colonial administration rejected the result and the Somalis remained in Kenya. [ 69 ] [ 70 ] Early independence period The first president and founding father of Kenya, Jomo Kenyatta The first direct elections for native Kenyans to the Legislative Council took place in 1957. Despite British hopes of handing power to "moderate" local rivals, it was the Kenya African National Union (KANU) of Jomo Kenyatta that formed a government. The Colony of Kenya and the Protectorate of Kenya each came to an end on 12 December 1963, with independence conferred on all of Kenya. The U.K. ceded sovereignty over the Colony of Kenya. The Sultan of Zanzibar agreed that simultaneous with independence for the colony, he would cease to have sovereignty over the Protectorate of Kenya so that all of Kenya would become one sovereign state. [ 71 ] [ 72 ] In this way, Kenya became an independent country under the Kenya Independence Act 1963 of the United Kingdom. On 12 December 1964, Kenya became a republic under the name "Republic of Kenya". [ 71 ] Concurrently, the Kenyan army fought the Shifta War against ethnic Somali rebels inhabiting the Northern Frontier District who wanted to join their kin in the Somali Republic to the north. [ 73 ] A ceasefire was eventually reached with the signing of the Arusha Memorandum in October 1967, but relative insecurity prevailed through 1969. [ 74 ] [ 75 ] To discourage further invasions, Kenya signed a defence pact with Ethiopia in 1969, which is still in effect. [ 76 ] [ 77 ] First presidency Further information: Presidency of Jomo Kenyatta and Jomo Kenyatta On 12 December 1964, the Republic of Kenya was proclaimed, and Jomo Kenyatta became Kenya's first president. [ 78 ] Under Kenyatta, corruption became widespread throughout the government, civil service, and business community. Kenyatta and his family were tied up with this corruption as they enriched themselves through the mass purchase of property after 1963. Their acquisitions in the Central, Rift Valley, and Coast Provinces aroused great anger among landless Kenyans. His family used his presidential position to circumvent legal or administrative obstacles to acquiring property. The Kenyatta family also heavily invested in the coastal hotel business, with Kenyatta personally owning the Leonard Beach Hotel. [ 79 ] Kenyatta's mixed legacy was highlighted at the 10-year anniversary of Kenya's independence. A December 1973 article in The New York Times praised Kenyatta's leadership and Kenya for emerging as a model of pragmatism and conservatism. Kenya's GDP had increased at an annual rate of 6.6%, higher than the population growth rate of more than 3%. [ 80 ] But Amnesty International responded to the article by stating the cost of the stability in terms of human rights abuses. The opposition party started by Oginga Odinga — Kenya People's Union (KPU)—was banned in 1969 after the Kisumu Massacre and KPU leaders were still in detention without trial in gross violation of the U.N. Declaration of Human Rights . [ 81 ] [ 82 ] The Kenya Students Union, Jehovah Witnesses and all opposition parties were outlawed. [ 81 ] Kenyatta ruled until his death on 22 August 1978. [ 83 ] Moi era Further information: Daniel arap Moi , Presidency of Daniel Moi , 1978 Kenyan presidential election , 1988 Kenyan general election , and 1992 Kenyan general election Daniel arap Moi , Kenya's second President, and George W. Bush , 2001 After Kenyatta died, Daniel arap Moi became president. He retained the presidency, running unopposed in elections held in 1979, 1983 ( snap elections ), and 1988, all of which were held under the single-party constitution. The 1983 elections were held a year early, and were a direct result of a failed military coup on 2 August 1982. The 1982 coup was masterminded by a low-ranking Air Force serviceman, Senior Private Hezekiah Ochuka , and was staged mainly by enlisted men of the Air Force. It was quickly suppressed by forces commanded by Chief of General Staff Mahamoud Mohamed , a veteran Somali military official. [ 84 ] They included the General Service Unit (GSU)—a paramilitary wing of the police—and later the regular police. On the heels of the Garissa Massacre of 1980, Kenyan troops committed the Wagalla massacre in 1984 against thousands of civilians in Wajir County . An official probe into the atrocities was later ordered in 2011. [ 85 ] [ clarification needed ] The election held in 1988 saw the advent of the mlolongo (queuing) system, where voters were supposed to line up behind their favoured candidates instead of casting a secret ballot. [ 86 ] This was seen as the climax of a very undemocratic regime and led to widespread agitation for constitutional reform. Several contentious clauses, including the one that allowed for only one political party, were changed in the following years. [ 87 ] Transition to multiparty democracy In 1991, Kenya transitioned to a multiparty political system after 26 years of single-party rule. On 28 October 1992, Moi dissolved parliament, five months before the end of his term. As a result, preparations began for all elective seats in parliament as well as the president. The election was scheduled to take place on 7 December 1992, but delays led to its postponement to 29 December. Apart from KANU, the ruling party, other parties represented in the elections included FORD Kenya and FORD Asili. This election was marked by large-scale intimidation of opponents and harassment of election officials. It resulted in an economic crisis propagated by ethnic violence as the president was accused of rigging electoral results to retain power. [ 88 ] [ 89 ] [ 90 ] This election was a turning point for Kenya as it signified the beginning of the end of Moi's leadership and the rule of KANU. Moi retained the presidency and George Saitoti became vice president. Although it held on to power, KANU won 100 seats and lost 88 seats to the six opposition parties. [ 88 ] [ 90 ] The 1992 elections marked the beginning of multiparty politics after more than 25 years of KANU rule. [ 88 ] Following skirmishes in the aftermath of the elections, 5,000 people were killed and another 75,000 displaced from their homes. [ 91 ] In the next five years, many political alliances were formed in preparation for the next elections. In 1994, Jaramogi Oginga Odinga died and several coalitions joined his FORD Kenya party to form a new party, United National Democratic Alliance. This party was plagued with disagreements. In 1995, Richard Leakey formed the Safina party, but it was denied registration until November 1997. [ 92 ] In 1996, KANU revised the constitution to allow Moi to remain president for another term. Subsequently, Moi stood for reelection and won a 5th term in 1997. [ 93 ] His win was strongly criticised by his major opponents, Kibaki and Odinga , as fraudulent. [ 92 ] [ 94 ] Following this win, Moi was constitutionally barred from another presidential term. Beginning in 1998, he attempted to influence the country's succession politics to have Uhuru Kenyatta elected in the 2002 elections. [ 95 ] President Kibaki and the road to a new constitution Further information: Mwai Kibaki , Presidency of Mwai Kibaki , 2002 Kenyan general election , and 2007 Kenyan general election Moi's plan to be replaced by Uhuru Kenyatta failed, and Mwai Kibaki , running for the opposition coalition "National Rainbow Coalition" ( NARC ), was elected president. David Anderson (2003) reports the elections were judged free and fair by local and international observers, and seemed to mark a turning point in Kenya's democratic evolution. [ 94 ] In 2005, Kenyans rejected a plan to replace the 1963 independence constitution with a new one. [ 96 ] As a result, the elections of 2007 took place following the procedure set by the old constitution. Kibaki was reelected in highly contested elections marred by political and ethnic violence . The main opposition leader, Raila Odinga, claimed the election was rigged and that he was the rightfully elected president. In the ensuing violence, 1,500 people were killed and another 600,000 internally displaced, making it the worst post-election violence in Kenya. To stop the death and displacement of people, Kibaki and Odinga agreed to work together, with the latter taking the position of a prime minister. [ 97 ] This made Odinga the second prime minister of Kenya . In July 2010, Kenya partnered with other East African countries to form the new East African Common Market within the East African Community . [ 98 ] In 2011, Kenya began sending troops to Somalia to fight the terror group Al-Shabaab . [ 99 ] In mid-2011, two consecutive missed rainy seasons precipitated the worst drought in East Africa in 60 years. The northwestern Turkana region was especially affected, [ 100 ] with local schools shut down as a result. [ 101 ] The crisis was reportedly over by early 2012 because of coordinated relief efforts. Aid agencies subsequently shifted their emphasis to recovery initiatives, including digging irrigation canals and distributing plant seeds. [ 102 ] In August 2010, Kenyans held a referendum and passed a new constitution , which limited presidential powers and devolved the central government. [ 92 ] Following the passage of the new constitution, Kenya became a presidential representative democratic republic, whereby the President of Kenya is both head of state and head of government , and of a multi-party system . The new constitution also states that executive powers are exercised by the executive branch of government, headed by the president, who chairs a cabinet composed of people chosen from outside parliament. Legislative power is vested exclusively in Parliament . The judiciary is independent of the executive and the legislature. Kenyatta and Ruto presidencies Main articles: Presidency of Uhuru Kenyatta and Presidency of William Ruto Uhuru Kenyatta In 2013, Kenya held its first general elections under the 2010 constitution. Uhuru Kenyatta won, though the result was unsuccessfully challenged at the Supreme Court by opposition leader Raila Odinga . [ 103 ] Kenyatta was re-elected in 2017 in another disputed election . Odinga accused the Independent Electoral and Boundaries Commission of mismanaging the election and Kenyatta and his party of rigging. The Supreme Court overturned the results in a landmark ruling that established its position as an independent check on the president. [ 104 ] [ 105 ] In the repeated election, Kenyatta won after Odinga refused to participate, citing irregularities. [ 106 ] [ 107 ] In March 2018, a historic handshake between Kenyatta and Odinga signaled a period of reconciliation followed by economic growth and increased stability. [ 108 ] [ 109 ] Between 2019 and 2021, the two combined efforts to promote major changes to the Kenyan constitution, labelled the "Building Bridges Initiative" (BBI). They said their efforts were to improve inclusion and overcome the country's election system that often resulted in post-election violence. [ 110 ] [ 111 ] The BBI proposal called for broad expansion of the legislative and executive branches, including the creation of a prime minister with two deputies and an official leader of the opposition, reverting to selecting cabinet ministers from among the elected Members of Parliament, establishing up to 70 new constituencies , and adding up to 300 unelected members of Parliament (under an " affirmative action " plan). [ 110 ] [ 111 ] Critics saw this as an attempt to reward political dynasties and blunt Deputy President Willian Ruto 's efforts to seek the presidency and bloat the government at a high cost to the debt-laded country. [ 110 ] [ 111 ] Ultimately, in May 2021, the Kenyan High Court ruled the BBI unconstitutional, because it was an effort of the government rather than a popular initiative . [ 110 ] [ 111 ] The court sharply criticized Kenyatta, laying out grounds for his being sued or even impeached . The ruling was seen as a major defeat for both Kenyatta and Odinga, but a boon to Odinga's future presidential-election rival, Ruto. [ 110 ] [ 111 ] In August 2021, Kenya's Court of Appeal upheld the High Court's judgement in an appeal from the BBI Secretariat . [ 112 ] Ruto narrowly won the 2022 presidential election , defeating Odinga to become Kenya's fifth president. [ 113 ] [ 114 ] In 2024, Ruto and the Kenya Kwanza coalition faced popular protests over the Kenyan Finance Bill 2024 . [ 115 ] Geography Main article: Geography of Kenya A map of Kenya. The label "Sudan" at upper left is now incorrect; the area is now part of South Sudan . A Köppen climate classification map of Kenya At 580,367 km 2 (224,081 sq mi), [ 11 ] Kenya is the world's 47th-largest country (after Madagascar ). It lies between latitudes 5°N and 5°S , and longitudes 34° and 42°E . From the coast on the Indian Ocean, the low plains rise to central highlands which are bisected by the Great Rift Valley , and fertile plateaus lie on either side, around Lake Victoria and to the east. [ 116 ] [ 117 ] The Kenyan Highlands are one of the most successful agricultural production regions in Africa. [ 118 ] The highlands are the site of the highest point in Kenya and the second highest peak on the continent: Mount Kenya , which reaches a height of 5,199 m (17,057 ft) and is the site of glaciers. Mount Kilimanjaro (5,895 m or 19,341 ft) can be seen from Kenya to the south of the Tanzanian border. Climate Kenya's climate varies from tropical along the coast to temperate inland to arid in the north and northeast parts of the country. The area receives a great deal of sunshine every month. It is usually cool at night and early in the morning inland at higher elevations. The "long rains" season occurs from March/April to May/June. The "short rains" season occurs from October to November/December. The rainfall is sometimes heavy and often falls in the afternoons and evenings. Climate change is altering the natural pattern of the rainfall period, causing an extension of the short rains, which has begat floods, [ 119 ] and reducing the drought cycle from every ten years to annual events, producing strong droughts such as the 2008–09 Kenya Drought . [ 120 ] The temperature remains high throughout these months of tropical rain. The hottest period is February and March, leading into the season of the long rains, and the coldest is in July, until mid-August. [ 121 ] Köppen climate classification map for Kenya for 1980–2016 2071–2100 map under the most intense climate change scenario . Mid-range scenarios are currently considered more likely. [ 122 ] [ 123 ] [ 124 ] Climate change is posing an increasing threat to global socioeconomic development and environmental sustainability. [ 125 ] Developing countries with low adaptive capacity and high vulnerability to the phenomenon are disproportionately affected. Climate change in Kenya is increasingly impacting the lives of Kenya's citizens and the environment . [ 125 ] Climate change has led to more frequent extreme weather events like droughts which last longer than usual, irregular and unpredictable rainfall, flooding and increasing temperatures. The effects of these climatic changes have made already existing challenges with water security , food security and economic growth even more difficult. Harvests and agricultural production which account for about 33% [ 126 ] of total Gross Domestic Product (GDP) [ 127 ] are also at risk. The increased temperatures, rainfall variability in arid and semi-arid areas, and strong winds associated with tropical cyclones have combined to create favourable conditions for the breeding and migration of pests. [ 128 ] An increase in temperature of up to 2.5 °C by 2050 is predicted to increase the frequency of extreme events such as floods and droughts . [ 125 ] Wildlife Main articles: Wildlife of Kenya and Environmental issues in Kenya Kenya has considerable land area devoted to wildlife habitats, including the Masai Mara , where blue wildebeest and other bovids participate in a large-scale annual migration . More than one million wildebeest and 200,000 zebras participate in the migration across the Mara River . [ 129 ] The "Big Five" game animals of Africa, that is the lion , leopard , buffalo , rhinoceros , and elephant , can be found in Kenya and in the Masai Mara in particular. A significant population of other wild animals, reptiles, and birds can be found in the national parks and game reserves in the country. The annual animal migration occurs between June and September, with millions of animals taking part, attracting valuable foreign tourism. Two million wildebeest migrate a distance of 2,900 kilometres (1,802 mi) from the Serengeti in neighbouring Tanzania to the Masai Mara [ 130 ] in Kenya, in a constant clockwise fashion, searching for food and water supplies. This Serengeti Migration of the wildebeest is listed among the Seven Natural Wonders of Africa . [ 131 ] Kenya had a 2019 Forest Landscape Integrity Index mean score of 4.2/10, ranking it 133rd globally out of 172 countries. [ 132 ] Government and politics Main article: Politics of Kenya Kenya's third president, Mwai Kibaki Kenya is a presidential representative democratic republic with a multi-party system . The president is both the head of state and head of government . Executive power is exercised by the government. Legislative power is vested in both the government and the National Assembly and the Senate . The Judiciary is independent of the executive and the legislature. There has been growing concern, especially during former president Daniel arap Moi's tenure, that the executive was increasingly meddling with the affairs of the judiciary. [ 133 ] Kenya has high levels of corruption according to Transparency International 's Corruption Perceptions Index (CPI), a metric which attempts to gauge the prevalence of public-sector corruption in various countries. In 2019, the nation placed 137th out of 180 countries in the index, with a score of 28 out of 100. [ 134 ] But there are several rather significant developments with regard to curbing corruption from the Kenyan government, for instance the establishment of a new and independent Ethics and Anti-Corruption Commission (EACC) . [ 135 ] The Supreme Court of Kenya building Following general elections held in 1997, the Constitution of Kenya Review Act, designed to pave the way for more comprehensive amendments to the Kenyan constitution, was passed by the national parliament. [ 136 ] In December 2002, Kenya held democratic and open elections, which were judged free and fair by most international observers. [ 137 ] The 2002 elections marked an important turning point in Kenya's democratic evolution in that power was transferred peacefully from the Kenya African National Union (KANU), which had ruled the country since independence, to the National Rainbow Coalition (NARC), a coalition of political parties. Under the presidency of Mwai Kibaki , the new ruling coalition promised to focus its efforts on generating economic growth, combating corruption, improving education, and rewriting its constitution. A few of these promises have been met. There is free primary education. [ 138 ] In 2007, the government issued a statement declaring that from 2008, secondary education would be heavily subsidised, with the government footing all tuition fees. [ 139 ] 2013 elections and new government Main articles: Kenyan general election, 2013 and Kenyan local elections, 2013 Under the new constitution and with President Kibaki prohibited by term limits from running for a third term, Deputy Prime Minister Uhuru Kenyatta ran for office. He won with 50.51% of the vote in March 2013. In December 2014, President Kenyatta signed a Security Laws Amendment Bill, which supporters of the law suggested was necessary to guard against armed groups. Opposition politicians, human rights groups, and nine Western countries criticised the security bill, arguing that it infringed on democratic freedoms. The governments of the United States , the United Kingdom , Germany , and France also collectively issued a press statement cautioning about the law's potential impact. Through the Jubilee Coalition, the Bill was later passed on 19 December in the National Assembly under acrimonious circumstances. [ 140 ] Foreign relations Main article: Foreign relations of Kenya President Barack Obama in Nairobi, July 2015 Kenya has close ties with its fellow Swahili -speaking neighbours in the African Great Lakes region. Relations with Uganda and Tanzania are generally strong, as the three nations work toward economic and social integration through common membership in the East African Community . Relations with Somalia have historically been tense, although there has been some military co-ordination against Islamist insurgents. Kenya has good relations with the United Kingdom. [ 141 ] Kenya is one of the most pro-American nations in Africa, and the wider world. [ 142 ] With International Criminal Court trial dates scheduled in 2013 for both President Kenyatta and Deputy President William Ruto related to the 2007 election aftermath, US president Barack Obama , who is half-Kenyan, chose not to visit the country during his mid-2013 African trip . [ 143 ] Later in the summer, Kenyatta visited China at the invitation of President Xi Jinping after a stop in Russia and not having visited the United States as president. [ 144 ] In July 2015, Obama visited Kenya, the first American president to visit the country while in office. [ 145 ] The British Army Training Unit Kenya (BATUK) is used for the training of British infantry battalions in the arid and rugged terrain of the Great Rift Valley . [ 146 ] [ 147 ] Armed forces Main article: Kenya Defence Forces Emblem of the Kenya Defence Forces The Kenya Defence Forces are the armed forces of Kenya. The Kenya Army , Kenya Navy , and Kenya Air Force compose the National Defence Forces. The current Kenya Defence Forces were established, and its composition laid out, in Article 241 of the 2010 Constitution of Kenya ; the KDF is governed by the Kenya Defence Forces Act of 2012. [ 148 ] The President of Kenya is the commander-in-chief of all the armed forces. The armed forces are regularly deployed in peacekeeping missions around the world. Further, in the aftermath of the national elections of December 2007 and the violence that subsequently engulfed the country, a commission of inquiry, the Waki Commission , commended its readiness and adjudged it to "have performed its duty well." [ 149 ] Nevertheless, there have been serious allegations of human rights violations, most recently while conducting counter-insurgency operations in the Mt Elgon area [ 150 ] and also in the district of Mandera central. [ 151 ] Kenya's armed forces, like many government institutions in the country, have been tainted by corruption allegations. Because the operations of the armed forces have been traditionally cloaked by the ubiquitous blanket of "state security", the corruption has been hidden from public view, and thus less subject to public scrutiny and notoriety. This has changed recently. In what are by Kenyan standards unprecedented revelations, in 2010, credible claims of corruption were made with regard to recruitment [ 152 ] and procurement of armoured personnel carriers. [ 153 ] Further, the wisdom and prudence of certain decisions of procurement have been publicly questioned. [ 154 ] Administrative divisions Main articles: Counties of Kenya and Divisions of Kenya Kenya's 47 counties Kenya is divided into 47 semi-autonomous counties that are headed by governors. These 47 counties form the first-order divisions of Kenya. The smallest administrative units in Kenya are called locations . Locations often coincide with electoral wards. Locations are usually named after their central villages/towns. Many larger towns consist of several locations. Each location has a chief, appointed by the state. Constituencies are an electoral subdivision, with each county comprising a whole number of constituencies. An interim boundaries commission was formed in 2010 to review the constituencies and in its report, it recommended the creation of an additional 80 constituencies. Previous to the 2013 elections, there were 210 constituencies in Kenya . [ 155 ] Human rights See also: Human rights in Kenya , LGBT rights in Kenya , and Human trafficking in Kenya Homosexual acts are illegal in Kenya and typically punishable by up to 14 years in prison. [ 156 ] According to a 2020 survey by the Pew Research Center , 83% of Kenyans believe that homosexuality should not be accepted by society. [ 157 ] While addressing a joint press conference together with President Barack Obama in 2015, President Kenyatta declined to assure Kenya's commitment to gay rights, saying that "the issue of gay rights is really a non-issue... But there are some things that we must admit we don't share. Our culture, our societies don't accept." [ 158 ] In November 2008, WikiLeaks brought wide international attention to The Cry of Blood report, which documents the extrajudicial killing of gangsters by the Kenyan police. In the report, the Kenya National Commission on Human Rights (KNCHR) reported these in their key finding "e)", stating that the forced disappearances and extrajudicial killings appeared to be official policy sanctioned by the political leadership and the police. [ 159 ] [ 160 ] Economy Main article: Economy of Kenya Kenya's macroeconomic outlook has steadily posted robust growth over the past few decades mostly from road , rail , air and water transport infrastructure projects as well as massive investments in Information and Communication Technology . The Kenyan economy is the largest in East Africa. After independence, Kenya promoted rapid economic growth through public investment, encouraged smallholder agricultural production and provided incentives for private industrial investment. Kenya is East Africa's regional transportation and financial hub. Kenya's financial sector is vibrant, well developed and diversified boasting the highest financial inclusion in the region and globally. [ 161 ] Foreign investments in Kenya remain relatively weak considering the size of its economy and its level of development. As of 2022, Kenya's total FDI stock stood at US$10.4 billion, accounting for a mere 9.5% of the country's GDP. [ 162 ] Kenya has a Human Development Index (HDI) of 0.555 (medium), ranked 145 out of 186 in the world. As of 2005 [update] , 17.7% of Kenyans lived on less than $1.25 a day. [ 163 ] Based on the most recent data from 2014, 37.5% of the population is affected by multidimensional poverty and an additional 35.8% vulnerable to it. [ 164 ] In 2017, Kenya ranked 92nd in the World Bank ease of doing business rising from 113rd in 2016 (of 190 countries). [ 165 ] The important agricultural sector is one of the least developed and largely inefficient, employing 75% of the workforce compared to less than 3% in the food secure developed countries . Kenya is usually classified as a frontier market or occasionally an emerging market , but it is not one of the least developed countries . The economy has seen much expansion, seen by strong performance in tourism, higher education and telecommunications and decent post-drought results in agriculture, especially the vital tea sector. [ 166 ] Kenya's economy grew by more than 7% in 2007, and its foreign debt was greatly reduced. [ 166 ] This changed immediately after the disputed presidential election of December 2007, following the chaos which engulfed the country. Telecommunications and financial activity over the last decade now comprise 62% of GDP. 22% of GDP still comes from the unreliable agricultural sector which employs 75% of the labour force (a characteristic of under-developed economies that have not attained food security ). A small portion of the population relies on food aid. [ 167 ] Industry and manufacturing is the smallest sector, accounting for 16% of GDP. The services, industry and manufacturing sectors only employ 25% of the labour force but contribute 75% of GDP. [ 166 ] Kenya also exports textiles worth over $400 million under AGOA . Privatisation of state corporations like the defunct Kenya Post and Telecommunications Company, which resulted in East Africa's most profitable company— Safaricom , has led to their revival because of massive private investment. As of May 2011 [update] , economic prospects are positive with 4–5% GDP growth expected, largely because of expansions in tourism , telecommunications , transport, construction, and a recovery in agriculture . The World Bank estimated growth of 4.3% in 2012. [ 168 ] Kenya, trends in the Human Development Index 1970–2010 In March 1996 the presidents of Kenya, Tanzania, and Uganda re-established the East African Community (EAC). The EAC's objectives include harmonising tariffs and customs regimes, free movement of people and improving regional infrastructures. In March 2004, the three East African countries signed a Customs Union Agreement . Kenya has a more developed financial services sector than its neighbours. The Nairobi Securities Exchange (NSE) is ranked 4th in Africa in terms of market capitalisation. The Kenyan banking system is supervised by the Central Bank of Kenya (CBK). As of late July 2004, the system consisted of 43 commercial banks (down from 48 in 2001) and several non-bank financial institutions including mortgage companies, four savings and loan associations and several core foreign-exchange bureaus. [ 166 ] The inaugural Kenya Innovation Week (KIW) was started in 2021, from December 6th to 10th, 2021, at the Kenya School of Government in Lower Kabete, Nairobi. [ 169 ] [ 170 ] Tourism Main article: Tourism in Kenya Amboseli National Park Tsavo East National Park Tourism in Kenya is the third-largest source of foreign exchange revenue following diaspora remittances and agriculture. [ 171 ] The Kenya Tourism Board is responsible for maintaining information pertaining to tourism in Kenya. [ 172 ] [ 173 ] The main tourist attractions are photo safaris through the 60 national parks and game reserves. Other attractions include the wildebeest migration at the Masaai Mara , which is considered to be the 7th wonder of the world; historical mosques, and colonial-era forts at Mombasa , Malindi , and Lamu ; renowned scenery such as the white-capped Mount Kenya and the Great Rift Valley ; tea plantations at Kericho ; coffee plantations at Thika ; a splendid view of Mount Kilimanjaro across the border into Tanzania; and the beaches along the Swahili Coast , in the Indian Ocean . Tourists, the largest number being from Germany and the United Kingdom , are attracted mainly to the coastal beaches and the game reserves , notably, the expansive East and Tsavo West National Park , 20,808 square kilometres (8,034 sq mi) to the southeast. [ citation needed ] Agriculture Main article: Agriculture in Kenya Tea farm near Kericho , Kericho County Agriculture is the second largest contributor to Kenya's gross domestic product (GDP) after the service sector. In 2005, agriculture, including forestry and fishing, accounted for 24% of GDP, as well as for 18% of wage employment and 50% of revenue from exports. The principal cash crops are tea, horticultural produce, and coffee. Horticultural produce and tea are the main growth sectors and the two most valuable of all of Kenya's exports. The production of major food staples such as corn is subject to sharp weather-related fluctuations. Production downturns periodically necessitate food aid—for example in 2004, due to one of Kenya's intermittent droughts . [ 174 ] A consortium led by the International Crops Research Institute for the Semi-Arid Tropics ( ICRISAT ) has had some success in helping farmers grow new pigeon pea varieties instead of maize, in particularly dry areas. Pigeon peas are very drought-resistant, so can be grown in areas with less than 650 millimetres (26 in) annual rainfall. Successive projects encouraged the commercialisation of legumes by stimulating the growth of local seed production and agro-dealer networks for distribution and marketing. This work, which included linking producers to wholesalers, helped to increase local producer prices by 20–25% in Nairobi and Mombasa. The commercialisation of the pigeon pea is now enabling some farmers to buy assets ranging from mobile phones to productive land and livestock, and is opening pathways for them to move out of poverty. [ 175 ] Tea, coffee, sisal, pyrethrum, corn, and wheat are grown in the fertile highlands, one of the most successful agricultural production regions in Africa. [ 118 ] Livestock predominates in the semi-arid savanna to the north and east. Coconuts , pineapples , cashew nuts , cotton, sugarcane , sisal , and corn are grown in the lower-lying areas. Kenya has not attained the level of investment and efficiency in agriculture that can guarantee food security, and coupled with resulting poverty (53% of the population lives below the poverty line), a significant portion of the population regularly starves and is heavily dependent on food aid. [ 167 ] Poor roads, an inadequate railway network, under-used water transport, and expensive air transport have isolated mostly arid and semi-arid areas, and farmers in other regions often leave food to rot in the fields because they cannot access markets. This was last seen in August and September 2011, prompting the Kenyans for Kenya initiative by the Red Cross . [ 176 ] Agricultural countryside in Kenya Kenya's irrigation sector is categorised into three organizational types: smallholder schemes, centrally-managed public schemes, and private/commercial irrigation schemes. The smallholder schemes are owned, developed, and managed by individuals or groups of farmers operating as water users or self-help groups. Irrigation is carried out on individual or on group farms averaging 0.1–0.4 ha. There are about 3,000 smallholder irrigation schemes covering a total area of 47,000 ha. The country has seven large, centrally managed irrigation schemes, namely Mwea, Bura , Hola , Perkera , West Kano, Bunyala, and Ahero , covering a total area of 18,200 ha and averaging 2,600 ha per scheme. These schemes are managed by the National Irrigation Board and account for 18% of irrigated land area in Kenya. Large-scale private commercial farms cover 45,000 hectares, accounting for 40% of irrigated land. They utilise high technology and produce high-value crops for the export market, especially flowers and vegetables. [ 177 ] Kenya is the world's 3rd largest exporter of cut flowers . [ 178 ] Roughly half of Kenya's 127 flower farms are concentrated around Lake Naivasha , 90 kilometres northwest of Nairobi. [ 178 ] To speed their export, Nairobi airport has a terminal dedicated to the transport of flowers and vegetables. [ 178 ] Industry and manufacturing The Kenya Commercial Bank office at KENCOM House (right) in Nairobi Although Kenya is a low middle-income country, manufacturing accounts for 14% of the GDP, with industrial activity concentrated around the three largest urban centres of Nairobi , Mombasa , and Kisumu , and is dominated by food-processing industries such as grain milling, beer production, sugarcane crushing, and the fabrication of consumer goods, e.g., vehicles from kits. Kenya also has a cement production industry. [ 179 ] Kenya has an oil refinery that processes imported crude petroleum into petroleum products, mainly for the domestic market. In addition, a substantial and expanding informal sector commonly referred to as jua kali engages in small-scale manufacturing of household goods, auto parts, and farm implements. [ 180 ] [ 181 ] Kenya's inclusion among the beneficiaries of the US Government's African Growth and Opportunity Act ( AGOA ) has given a boost to manufacturing in recent years. Since AGOA took effect in 2000, Kenya's clothing sales to the United States increased from US$44 million to US$270 million (2006). [ 182 ] Other initiatives to strengthen manufacturing have been the new government's favourable tax measures, including the removal of duty on capital equipment and other raw materials. [ 183 ] In 2023, Kenya is in the process of constructing five industrial parks that will operate tax-free, with an anticipated completion date set for 2030. There are intentions to develop an additional 20 industrial parks in the future. [ 184 ] Transport Main article: Transport in Kenya Two trans-African automobile routes pass through Kenya: the Cairo-Cape Town Highway and the Lagos-Mombasa Highway , so the country has an extensive road network of paved and unpaved roads. Kenya's railway system links the nation's ports and major cities, connecting it with neighbouring Uganda. There are 15 airports which have paved runways. Energy Main article: Energy in Kenya Workers at Olkaria Geothermal Power Plant The largest share of Kenya's electricity supply comes from geothermal energy, [ 185 ] followed by hydroelectric stations at dams along the upper Tana River , as well as the Turkwel Gorge Dam in the west. A petroleum-fired plant on the coast, geothermal facilities at Olkaria (near Nairobi), and electricity imported from Uganda make up the rest of the supply. A 2,000 MW powerline from Ethiopia is nearing completion. Kenya's installed capacity increased from 1,142 megawatts between 2001 and 2003 to 2,341 in 2016. [ 186 ] The state-owned Kenya Electricity Generating Company (KenGen) , established in 1997 under the name of Kenya Power Company, handles the generation of electricity, while Kenya Power handles the electricity transmission and distribution system in the country. Shortfalls of electricity occur periodically, when drought reduces water flow. To become energy sufficient, Kenya has installed wind power and solar power (over 300 MW each), and aims to build a nuclear power plant by 2027. [ 187 ] [ 188 ] Kenya has proven deposits of oil in Turkana . Tullow Oil estimates the country's oil reserves to be around one billion barrels. [ 189 ] Exploration is still continuing to determine whether there are more reserves. Kenya currently imports all crude petroleum requirements. It has no strategic reserves and relies solely on oil marketers' 21-day oil reserves required under industry regulations. Petroleum accounts for 20% to 25% of the national import bill. [ 190 ] Chinese investment and trade Published comments on Kenya's Capital FM website by Liu Guangyuan, China's ambassador to Kenya , at the time of President Kenyatta's 2013 trip to Beijing, said, "Chinese investment in Kenya ... reached $474 million, representing Kenya's largest source of foreign direct investment, and ... bilateral trade ... reached $2.84 billion" in 2012. Kenyatta was "[a]ccompanied by 60 Kenyan business people [and hoped to] ... gain support from China for a planned $2.5 billion railway from the southern Kenyan port of Mombasa to neighbouring Uganda, as well as a nearly $1.8 billion dam", according to a statement from the president's office, also at the time of the trip. [ 144 ] Base Titanium, a subsidiary of Base resources of Australia, shipped its first major consignment of minerals to China. About 25,000 tonnes of ilmenite was flagged off the Kenyan coastal town of Kilifi. The first shipment was expected to earn Kenya about KSh.15–20 billion/= in earnings. [ 191 ] In 2014, the Chinese contracted railway project from Nairobi to Mombasa was suspended due to a dispute over compensation for land acquisition. [ 192 ] Vision 2030 The official logo of Vision 2030 In 2007, the Kenyan government unveiled Vision 2030 , an economic development programme it hopes will put the country in the same league as the Asian Economic Tigers by 2030. In 2013, it launched a National Climate Change Action Plan, having acknowledged that omitting climate as a key development issue in Vision 2030 was an oversight failure. The 200-page Action Plan, developed with support from the Climate & Development Knowledge Network , sets out the Government of Kenya's vision for a 'low-carbon climate resilient development pathway'. At the launch in March 2013, the Secretary of the Ministry of Planning, National Development, and Vision 2030 emphasized that climate would be a central issue in the renewed Medium-Term Plan that would be launched in the coming months. This would create a direct and robust delivery framework for the Action Plan and ensure climate change is treated as an economy-wide issue. [ 193 ] Furthermore, Kenya submitted an updated, more ambitious NDC on 24 December 2020, with a commitment to abate greenhouse gases by 32 percent by 2030 relative to the business-as-usual scenario and in line with its sustainable development agenda and national circumstances. [ 194 ] Economic summary GDP $41.84 billion (2012) at Market Price. $76.07 billion (Purchasing Power Parity, 2012) There exists an informal economy that is never counted as part of the official GDP figures. Annual growth rate 5.1% (2012) Per capita income Per Capita Income (PPP)= $1,800 Agricultural produce tea, coffee, corn , wheat, sugarcane , fruit, vegetables, dairy products, beef, pork, poultry, eggs Industry small-scale consumer goods (plastic, furniture, batteries, textiles, clothing, soap, cigarettes, flour), agricultural products, horticulture, oil refining; aluminium, steel, lead; cement, commercial ship repair, tourism Trade in 2012 Exports $5.942 billion tea, coffee, horticultural products, petroleum products, cement, fish Major markets Uganda 9.9%, Tanzania 9.6%, Netherlands 8.4%, UK, 8.1%, US 6.2%, Egypt 4.9%, Democratic Republic of the Congo 4.2% (2012) [ 11 ] Imports $14.39 billion machinery and transportation equipment, petroleum products, motor vehicles, iron and steel, resins and plastics Major suppliers China 15.3%, India 13.8%, UAE 10.5%, Saudi Arabia 7.3%, South Africa 5.5%, Japan 4.0% (2012) [ 11 ] Oil exploration See also: Oil in Kenya Lake Turkana borders Turkana County. Kenya has proven oil deposits in Turkana County . President Mwai Kibaki announced on 26 March 2012 that Tullow Oil , an Anglo-Irish oil exploration firm, had struck oil, but its commercial viability and subsequent production would take about three years to confirm. [ 195 ] Early in 2006, Chinese president Hu Jintao signed an oil exploration contract with Kenya, part of a series of deals designed to keep Africa's natural resources flowing to China's rapidly expanding economy. A family of lions in Maasai Mara The deal allowed for China's state-controlled offshore oil and gas company, CNOOC , to prospect for oil in Kenya, which is just beginning to drill its first exploratory wells on the borders of Sudan and the disputed area of North Eastern Province , on the border with Somalia and in coastal waters. There are formal estimates of the possible reserves of oil discovered. [ 196 ] Action against pollution In 2017, Kenya banned single-use plastic bags. According to the national environmental authority, 80% of the public has adhered to this ban. Subsequently, in 2020, the prohibition of single-use plastics was extended to protected areas, including parks and forests. [ 197 ] A law passed in July 2023 mandates companies to actively reduce the pollution and environmental impact caused by the products they introduce into the Kenyan market, either individually or through collective schemes. Unlike previous practices, businesses are now obligated to participate in waste collection and recycling initiatives, such the Petco initiative established by the government in 2018. [ 197 ] Labour and human capital Kenya has a labour force of around 24 million and a total labour force participation rate of 74%, the unemployment rate in 2022 was estimated at 5.6% [ 198 ] According to the World Bank's 2019 Human Capital Index (HCI), which measured human capital of the next generation, Kenya ranked first in sub-Saharan Africa with an HCI score of 0.52. The index combined several key indicators, which are school enrolment, child survival, quality of learning, healthy growth and adult survival into a single index ranging between 0–1. [ 199 ] Microfinance Main article: Microfinance in Kenya More than 20 institutions offer business loans on a large scale, specific agriculture loans, education loans, and loans for other purposes. Additionally, there are: emergency loans, which are more expensive in respect to interest rates, but are quickly available group loans for smaller groups (four to five members) and larger groups (up to 30 members) women's loans, which are also available to groups of women Out of approximately 40 million Kenyans, about 14 million are unable to receive financial service through formal loan application services, and an additional 12 million have no access to financial service institutions at all. Further, one million Kenyans are reliant on informal groups for receiving financial aid. [ 200 ] To mitigate this problem, the mobile banking service M-Pesa was launched in 2007 by Vodafone and Safaricom , in collaboration from the Financial Deepening Challenge Fund competition established by the UK government's Department for International Development. M-Pesa allows users to deposit, withdraw, transfer money, pay for goods and services (Lipa na M-Pesa), access credit and savings, all with a mobile device, [ 201 ] has provided access to digital transactions to millions of Kenyans in poverty situation. [ 202 ] Demographics Main article: Demographics of Kenya A Bantu Kikuyu woman in traditional attire Population [ 203 ] [ 204 ] Year Million 1948 5.4 1962 8.3 1969 10.9 2000 31.4 2021 53 The census carried out by the Kenya National Bureau of Statistics in 2019 reported Kenya's population as 47,564,296. [ 7 ] The country has a young population, with 73% of residents under 30 because of rapid population growth , [ 205 ] [ 206 ] from 2.9 million to 40 million inhabitants over the last century. [ 207 ] Nairobi is home to Kibera , one of the world's largest slums. The shantytown is believed to house between 170,000 [ 208 ] and one million people. [ 209 ] The UNHCR base in Dadaab in the north houses around 500,000. [ 210 ] Ethnic groups Kenya has a diverse population that includes many of Africa's major ethnoracial and linguistic groups. Although there is no official list of Kenyan ethnic groups, the number of ethnic categories and sub-categories recorded in the country's census has changed significantly over time, expanding from 42 in 1969 to more than 120 in 2019. [ 211 ] Most residents are Bantus (60%) or Nilotes (30%). [ 212 ] Cushitic groups also form a small ethnic minority, as do Arabs, Indians, and Europeans. [ 212 ] [ 213 ] According to the Kenya National Bureau of Statistics (KNBS), in 2019, the largest native ethnic groups were the Kikuyu (8,148,668), Luhya (6,823,842), Kalenjin (6,358,113), Luo (5,066,966), Kamba (4,663,910), Somali (2,780,502), Kisii (2,703,235), Mijikenda (2,488,691), Meru (1,975,869), Maasai (1,189,522), and Turkana (1,016,174). The North Eastern Province of Kenya, formerly known as NFD, is predominantly inhabited by the indigenous ethnic Somalis . Foreign-rooted populations include Arabs , Asians , and Europeans . [ 2 ] Languages Main article: Languages of Kenya Kenya's ethnic groups typically speak their mother tongues within their own communities. The two official languages , English and Swahili , are used in varying degrees of fluency for communication with other populations. English is widely spoken in commerce, schooling, and government. [ 214 ] Peri-urban and rural dwellers are less multilingual, with many in rural areas speaking only their native languages. [ 215 ] British English is primarily used in Kenya. Additionally, a distinct local dialect, Kenyan English , is used by some communities and individuals in the country, and contains features unique to it that were derived from local Bantu languages such as Kiswahili and Kikuyu . [ 216 ] It has been developing since colonisation and also contains certain elements of American English . Sheng is a Kiswahili-based cant spoken in some urban areas. Primarily a mixture of Swahili and English, it is an example of linguistic code-switching . [ 217 ] 69 languages are spoken in Kenya. Most belong to two broad language families: Niger-Congo ( Bantu branch ) and Nilo-Saharan ( Nilotic branch ), spoken by the country's Bantu and Nilotic populations respectively. The Cushitic and Arab ethnic minorities speak languages belonging to the separate Afroasiatic family, with the Indian and European residents speaking languages from the Indo-European family. [ 218 ] Urban centres Main article: List of cities and towns in Kenya by population Largest cities or towns in Kenya According to the 2019 Census [ 219 ] Rank Name County Pop. Rank Name County Pop. Nairobi Mombasa 1 Nairobi Nairobi 4 397 073 11 Ongata Rongai Kajiado 172 569 2 Mombasa Mombasa 1 208 333 12 Garissa Garissa 163 399 3 Nakuru Nakuru 570 674 13 Kitale Trans-Nzoia 162 174 4 Ruiru Kiambu 490 120 14 Juja Kiambu 156 041 5 Eldoret Uasin Gishu 475 716 15 Mlolongo Machakos 136 351 6 Kisumu Kisumu 397 957 16 Malindi Kilifi 119 859 7 Kikuyu Kiambu 323 881 17 Mandera Mandera 114 718 8 Thika Kiambu 251 407 18 Kisii Kisii 112 417 9 Naivasha Nakuru 198 444 19 Kakamega Kakamega 107 227 10 Karuri Kiambu 194 342 20 Ngong Kajiado 102 323 Religion Main article: Religion in Kenya Holy Ghost Roman Catholic Cathedral in Mombasa Most Kenyans are Christian (85.5%), with 33.4% Protestant , 20.6% Roman Catholic and 20.4% Evangelical . Roman Catholicism is the largest single Christian denomination in Kenya with about 10 million members. [ 2 ] The Presbyterian Church of East Africa has 3 million followers in Kenya and surrounding countries. [ 220 ] There are smaller conservative Reformed churches, the Africa Evangelical Presbyterian Church , [ 221 ] the Independent Presbyterian Church in Kenya , and the Reformed Church of East Africa . Orthodox Christianity has 621,200 adherents. [ 222 ] Kenya has by far the highest number of Quakers of any country in the world, with around 146,300. [ 223 ] The only Jewish synagogue in the country is in Nairobi. Islam is the second largest religion , comprising 11% of the population. [ 3 ] 60% of Kenyan Muslims live in the Coastal Region , comprising 50% of the total population there, while the upper part of Kenya's Eastern Region is home to 10% of the country's Muslims, where they are the majority religious group. [ 224 ] Indigenous beliefs are practised by 0.7% of the population, although many self-identifying Christians and Muslims maintain some traditional beliefs and customs . Nonreligious Kenyans are 1.6% of the population. [ 2 ] Some Hindus also live in Kenya. The numbers are estimated to be around 60,287, or 0.13% of the population. [ 2 ] Health Main article: Health in Kenya Outpatient Department of AIC Kapsowar Hospital [ 225 ] in Kapsowar Health care is one of the low-priority sectors in Kenya and was allocated 4.8% of the national budget in 2019/2020 or just 4.59% of GDP compared to high-priority sectors such as education which was allocated more than 25%. This is below the 4.98% average in Sub-Saharan Africa and 9.83% spent globally. According to the National and County Health Budget Analysis FY 2020/21, the breakdown of county health expenditure was 58% on Policy Planning and Administrative Support Services, 28% on Curative and Rehabilitative Health Services, 8% on Preventive and Promotive Health Services and 7% on Other Programmes. Health care is largely funded by private individuals and their families or employers through direct payments to health care providers , to the National Health Insurance Fund or to medical insurance companies. Additional funding comes from local, international and some government social safety net schemes. Public hospitals are fee-for-service establishments that generate large amounts of county and national government revenues making them highly political and corrupt enterprises. [ 226 ] Private health facilities are diverse, highly dynamic, and difficult to classify, unlike public health facilities, which are easily grouped in classes that consist of community-based (level I) services, run by community health workers ; dispensaries (level II facilities) run by nurses ; health centres (level III facilities), run by clinical officers ; sub-county hospitals (level IV facilities), which may be run by a clinical officer or a medical officer ; county hospitals (level V facilities), which may be run by a medical officer or a medical practitioner ; and national referral hospitals (level VI facilities), which are run by fully qualified medical practitioners . Table showing different grades of clinical officers, medical officers, and medical practitioners in Kenya's public service Nurses are by far the largest group of front-line health care providers in all sectors, followed by clinical officers, medical officers, and medical practitioners. These are absorbed and deployed into government service in accordance with the Scheme of Service for Nursing Personnel (2014), the Revised Scheme of Service for Clinical Personnel (2020) and the Revised Scheme of Service for Medical Officers and Dental Officers (2016). Traditional healers ( herbalists , witch doctors , and faith healers ) are readily available, trusted, and widely consulted as practitioners of first or last choice by both rural and urban dwellers. Despite major achievements in the health sector, Kenya still faces many challenges. The estimated life expectancy dropped in 2009 to approximately 55 years — five years below the 1990 level. [ 227 ] The infant mortality rate was high at approximately 44 deaths per 1,000 children in 2012. [ 228 ] The WHO estimated in 2011 that only 42% of births were attended by a skilled health professional. [ 229 ] Diseases of poverty directly correlate with a country's economic performance and wealth distribution : In 2015/16, 35.6% of Kenyans lived below the poverty line. [ 230 ] Preventable diseases like malaria, HIV/AIDS, pneumonia, diarrhoea, and malnutrition are the biggest burden, major child-killers, and responsible for much morbidity; weak policies, corruption, inadequate health workers, weak management, and poor leadership in the public health sector are largely to blame. According to 2009 estimates, HIV/AIDS prevalence is about 6.3% of the adult population. [ 231 ] However, the 2011 UNAIDS Report suggests that the HIV epidemic may be improving in Kenya, as HIV prevalence is declining among young people (ages 15–24) and pregnant women. [ 232 ] Kenya had an estimated 15 million cases of malaria in 2006. [ 233 ] Tuberculosis is a major public health problem. The per capita incidence of TB in Kenya more than quadrupled between 1990 and 2015. [ 234 ] The 2024 Global Hunger Index gave Kenya a 25.0 score, indicating that the severity of hunger is "serious". [ 235 ] Women Main articles: Women in Kenya , Child marriage in Kenya , and Polygamy in Kenya The total fertility rate in Kenya was estimated to be 4.49 children per woman in 2012. [ 236 ] According to a 2008–09 survey by the Kenyan government, the total fertility rate was 4.6% and the contraception usage rate among married women was 46%. [ 237 ] Maternal mortality is high, partly because of female genital mutilation , [ 166 ] with about 27% of women having undergone it. [ 238 ] This practice is however on the decline as the country becomes more modernised, and in 2011 it was banned in Kenya. [ 239 ] Women were economically empowered before colonialisation. By colonial land alienation, women lost access and control of land. [ 240 ] They became more economically dependent on men. [ 240 ] A colonial order of gender emerged where males dominated females. [ 240 ] Median age at first marriage increases with increasing education. [ 241 ] Rape, defilement, and battering are not always seen as serious crimes. [ 242 ] Reports of sexual assault are not always taken seriously. [ 242 ] Youth Article 260 of the Kenyan Constitution of 2010 defines youth as those between the ages of 18 and 34. [ 243 ] According to the 2019 Population and Census results, 75 percent of the 47.6 million population is under the age of 35, making Kenya a country of the youth . [ 244 ] Youth unemployment and underemployment in Kenya has become a problem. [ 245 ] According to the Kenya National Bureau of Statistics (KNBS), approximately 1.7 million people lost their jobs as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, which eliminated some informal jobs and caused the economy to slow. [ 245 ] The Kenyan government has made progress in addressing the high youth unemployment by implementing various affirmative action programs and projects which include: the National Youth Service , The National Youth Enterprise Development Fund, [ 246 ] The Women Enterprise Fund, [ 247 ] Kazi Mtaani, Ajira Digital , Kikao Mtaani, [ 248 ] Uwezo fund, [ 249 ] Future Bora [ 250 ] and Studio mashinani [ 251 ] that empower youth , offer job opportunities and to raise one's standard of living. Education Main article: Education in Kenya School children in a classroom An MSc student at Kenyatta University in Nairobi Children attend nursery school, or kindergarten in the private sector until they are five years old. This lasts one to three years (KG1, KG2 and KG3) and is financed privately because there has been no government policy on pre-schooling until recently. [ 252 ] Basic formal education starts at age six and lasts 12 years, consisting of eight years in primary school and four in high school or secondary. Primary school is free in public schools and those attending can join a vocational youth/village polytechnic, or make their own arrangements for an apprenticeship program and learn a trade such as tailoring, carpentry, motor vehicle repair, brick-laying and masonry for about two years. [ 253 ] Those who complete high school can join a polytechnic or other technical college and study for three years, or proceed directly to university and study for four years. Graduates from the polytechnics and colleges can then join the workforce and later obtain a specialised higher diploma qualification after a further one to two years of training, or join the university—usually in the second or third year of their respective course. The higher diploma is accepted by many employers in place of a bachelor's degree and direct or accelerated admission to post-graduate studies is possible in some universities. A Maasai girl at school Public universities in Kenya are highly commercialised institutions and only a small fraction of qualified high school graduates are admitted on limited government-sponsorship into programs of their choice. Most are admitted into the social sciences, which are cheap to run, or as self-sponsored students paying the full cost of their studies. Most qualified students who miss out opt for middle-level diploma programs in public or private universities, colleges, and polytechnics. In 2018, 18.5 percent of the Kenyan adult population was illiterate, which was the highest rate of literacy in East Africa. [ 254 ] [ 255 ] There are very wide regional disparities: for example, Nairobi had the highest level of literacy at 87.1 per cent, compared to North Eastern Province, the lowest, at 8.0 per cent. Preschool, which targets children from age three to five, is an integral component of the education system and is a key requirement for admission to Standard One (First Grade). At the end of primary education, pupils sit the Kenya Certificate of Primary Education (KCPE), which determines those who proceed to secondary school or vocational training. The result of this examination is needed for placement at secondary school. [ 253 ] Primary school is for students aged 6/7-13/14 years. For those who proceed to the secondary level, there is a national examination at the end of Form Four – the Kenya Certificate of Secondary Education (KCSE), which determines those proceeding to the universities, other professional training, or employment. Students sit examinations in eight subjects of their choosing. However, English, Kiswahili, and mathematics are compulsory subjects. The Kenya Universities and Colleges Central Placement Service (KUCCPS), formerly the Joint Admissions Board (JAB), is responsible for selecting students joining the public universities. Other than the public schools, there are many private schools, mainly in urban areas. Similarly, there are a number of international schools catering to various overseas educational systems. Kenya was ranked 96th in the Global Innovation Index in 2024. [ 256 ] Culture Main article: Culture of Kenya This section needs additional citations for verification . Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources in this section. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. Find sources: "Kenya" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( December 2020 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Kenyan boys and girls performing a traditional dance Nation Media House, which hosts the Nation Media Group The culture of Kenya comprises multiple traditions. Kenya has no single prominent culture. It instead consists of the various cultures of the country's different communities. Notable populations include the Swahili on the coast, several other Bantu communities in the central and western regions, and Nilotic communities in the northwest. The Maasai culture is well known to tourism, despite constituting a relatively small part of Kenya's population. They are renowned for their elaborate upper-body adornment and jewellery. Kenya has an extensive music, television, and theatre scene. Literature Main article: Kenyan literature Kenyan author Ngũgĩ wa Thiong'o Ngũgĩ wa Thiong'o is one of Kenya's best-known writers. His novel Weep Not, Child depicts life in Kenya during the British occupation. The story details the effects of the Mau Mau on the lives of Kenyans. Its combination of themes— colonialism , education, and love—helped make it one of the best-known African novels. M.G. Vassanji 's 2003 novel The In-Between World of Vikram Lall won the Giller Prize in 2003. It is the fictional memoir of a Kenyan of Indian heritage and his family as they adjust to the changing political climates in colonial and post-colonial Kenya. Since 2003, the literary journal Kwani? has been publishing Kenyan contemporary literature. Kenya has also nurtured emerging versatile authors such as Paul Kipchumba (Kipwendui, Kibiwott) who demonstrate a pan-African outlook. [ 257 ] Music Main article: Music of Kenya Popular Kenyan musician Jua Cali Kenya has a diverse assortment of popular music forms, in addition to multiple types of folk music based on the variety of over 40 regional languages. [ 258 ] Drums are the most dominant instrument in popular Kenyan music. Drum beats are very complex and include both native rhythms and imported ones, especially the Congolese cavacha rhythm. Popular Kenyan music usually involves the interplay of multiple parts, and more recently, showy guitar solos as well. There are also a number of local hip-hop artists, including Jua Cali ; Afro-pop bands such as Sauti Sol ; and musicians who play local genres like Benga, such as Akothee . Lyrics are most often in Kiswahili or English. There is also some emerging aspect of Lingala borrowed from Congolese musicians. Lyrics are also written in local languages. Urban radio generally only plays English music, though there also exist a number of vernacular radio stations. Zilizopendwa is a genre of local urban music that was recorded in the 1960s, 70s, and 80s by musicians such as Daudi Kabaka , Fadhili William , and Sukuma Bin Ongaro, and is particularly enjoyed by older people—having been popularised by the Kenya Broadcasting Corporation's Kiswahili service (formerly called Voice of Kenya or VOK). The Isukuti is a vigorous dance performed by the Luhya sub-tribes to the beat of a traditional drum called the Isukuti during many occasions such as the birth of a child, marriage, or funeral. Other traditional dances include the Ohangla among the Luo , Nzele among the Mijikenda , Mugithi among the Kikuyu , and Taarab among the Swahili . Kenya has a growing Christian gospel music scene. Prominent local gospel musicians include the Kenyan Boys Choir . Benga music has been popular since the late 1960s, especially in the area around Lake Victoria . The word benga is occasionally used to refer to any kind of pop music. Bass, guitar, and percussion are the usual instruments. Sports Main article: Sport in Kenya Jepkosgei Kipyego and Jepkemoi Cheruiyot at the 2012 London Olympics Kenya is active in several sports, among them cricket , rallying , football , rugby , field hockey , and boxing . The country is known chiefly for its dominance in middle-distance and long-distance athletics, having consistently produced Olympic and Commonwealth Games champions in various distance events, especially in 800 m, 1,500 m, 3,000 m steeplechase, 5,000 m, 10,000 m, and the marathon. Kenyan athletes (particularly Kalenjin ), continue to dominate the world of distance running, although competition from Morocco and Ethiopia has reduced this supremacy. Some of Kenya's best-known athletes include the four-time women's Boston Marathon winner and two-time world champion Catherine Ndereba , 800m world record holder David Rudisha , former marathon world record-holder Paul Tergat , and 5000m Olympic gold medalist John Ngugi . Kenya's most decorated athlete is three-time Olympic gold medalist and eleven-time world marathon major champion, Eliud Kipchoge . Kenya won several medals during the Beijing Olympics: six gold, four silver, and four bronze, making it Africa's most successful nation in the 2008 Olympics. New athletes gained attention, such as Pamela Jelimo , the women's 800m gold medalist who went on to win the IAAF Golden League jackpot, and Samuel Wanjiru , who won the men's marathon. Retired Olympic and Commonwealth Games champion Kipchoge Keino helped usher in Kenya's ongoing distance dynasty in the 1970s and was followed by Commonwealth Champion Henry Rono 's spectacular string of world record performances. Lately, there has been controversy in Kenyan athletics circles, with the defection of a number of Kenyan athletes to represent other countries, chiefly Bahrain and Qatar . [ 259 ] The Kenyan Ministry of Sports has tried to stop the defections, but they have continued anyway, with Bernard Lagat being the latest, choosing to represent the United States. [ 259 ] Most of these defections occur because of economic or financial factors. [ 260 ] Decisions by the Kenyan government to tax athletes' earnings may also be a motivating factor. [ 261 ] Some elite Kenyan runners who cannot qualify for their country's strong national team find it easier to qualify by running for other countries. [ 262 ] Kenyan Olympic and world record holder in the 800 metres, David Rudisha Kenya has been a dominant force in women's volleyball within Africa, with both the clubs and the national team winning various continental championships in the past decade. [ 263 ] [ 264 ] The women's team has competed at the Olympics and World Championships , though without any notable success. Cricket is another popular sport, also ranking as the most successful team sport. Kenya has competed in the Cricket World Cup since 1996 . They upset some of the world's best teams and reached the semi-finals of the 2003 tournament . They won the inaugural World Cricket League Division 1 hosted in Nairobi and participated in the World T20. They also participated in the ICC Cricket World Cup 2011 . Their current captain is Rakep Patel . [ 265 ] Rugby is increasing in popularity, especially with the annual Safari Sevens tournament. The Kenya Sevens team ranked 9th in the IRB Sevens World Series for the 2006 season. In 2016, the team beat Fiji at the Singapore Sevens finals, making Kenya the second African nation after South Africa to win a World Series championship. [ 266 ] [ 267 ] [ 268 ] Kenya was once also a regional powerhouse in football. However, its dominance has been eroded by wrangles within the now defunct Kenya Football Federation , [ 269 ] leading to a suspension by FIFA which was lifted in March 2007. [ citation needed ] In the motor rallying arena, Kenya is home to the world-famous Safari Rally , commonly acknowledged as one of the toughest rallies in the world. [ 270 ] First held in 1953, it was a part of the World Rally Championship for many years until its exclusion after the 2002 event owing to financial difficulties. Some of the best rally drivers in the world have taken part in and won the rally, such as Björn Waldegård , Hannu Mikkola , Tommi Mäkinen , Shekhar Mehta , Carlos Sainz , and Colin McRae . The Safari Rally returned to the world championship in 2021 , after the 2003–2019 events ran as part of the African Rally Championship . [ citation needed ] Nairobi has hosted several major continental sports events, including the FIBA Africa Championship 1993 , where Kenya's national basketball team finished in the top four, its best performance to date. [ 271 ] Kenya also has its own ice hockey team, the Kenya Ice Lions. [ 272 ] The team's home ground is the Solar Ice Rink at the Panari Sky Centre in Nairobi, [ 273 ] [ 274 ] which is the first and largest ice rink in all of Africa. [ 275 ] Kenya men's national field hockey team was considered one of the good teams in the world during 1960s and 1970s. Roshan Ali, former goalkeeper of Kenya field hockey team Kenya took 6th position in 1964 Summer Olympics hockey tournament and 4th in 1971 Men's FIH Hockey World Cup . Cuisine Ugali and sukuma wiki , staples of Kenyan cuisine Kenyans generally have three meals in a day—breakfast ( kiamsha kinywa ), lunch ( chakula cha mchana ), and supper ( chakula cha jioni or simply chajio ). In between, they have the 10-o'clock tea ( chai ya saa nne ) and 4 p.m. tea ( chai ya saa kumi ). Breakfast is usually tea or porridge with bread, chapati , mahamri , boiled sweet potatoes, or yams . Githeri is a common lunchtime dish in many households, while Ugali with vegetables, sour milk ( mursik ), meat, fish, or any other stew is generally eaten by much of the population for lunch or supper. Regional variations and dishes also exist. In western Kenya, among the Luo , fish is a common dish; among the Kalenjin , who dominate much of the Rift Valley Region, mursik—sour milk—is a common drink. In cities such as Nairobi, there are fast-food restaurants, including Steers , KFC , [ 276 ] and Subway . [ 277 ] There are also many fish-and-chips shops. [ 278 ] Cheese is becoming more popular in Kenya, with consumption increasing particularly among the middle class. [ 279 ] [ 280 ] See also Foreign relations of Kenya Index of Kenya-related articles List of counties of Kenya by GDP List of counties of Kenya by area List of Kenyans Outline of Kenya Water supply and sanitation in Kenya Notes ^ / ˈ k ɛ n j ə / [ 12 ] ^ Swahili : Jamhuri ya Kenya References ^ a b Constitution (2009) Art. 7 [National, official and other languages] "(1) The national language of the Republic is Swahili. (2) The official languages of the Republic are Swahili and English. (3) The State shall–-–- (a) promote and protect the diversity of language of the people of Kenya; and (b) promote the development and use of indigenous languages, Kenyan Sign language, Braille and other communication formats and technologies accessible to persons with disabilities." ^ a b c d e f "2019 Kenya Population and Housing Census Volume IV: Distribution of Population by Socio-Economic Characteristics" . Kenya National Bureau of Statistics . Archived from the original on 5 June 2020 . Retrieved 24 March 2020 . ^ a b "2022 Report on International Religious Freedom: Kenya" . United States Department of State. Archived from the original on 31 October 2023 . Retrieved 24 December 2023 . ^ "Demographic Yearbook – Table 3: Population by sex, rate of population increase, surface area and density" (PDF) . United Nations Statistics Division. 2012. Archived (PDF) from the original on 26 August 2020 . Retrieved 4 September 2017 . ^ "United Nations Statistics Division – Demographic and Social Statistics" . unstats.un.org . Archived from the original on 28 April 2015 . Retrieved 4 September 2017 . ^ "The Kenya National Bureau of Statistics" . The Kenya National Bureau of Statistics . Retrieved 23 June 2024 . ^ a b c "2019 Kenya Population and Housing Census Results" . Kenya National Bureau of Statistics . 4 November 2019. Archived from the original on 13 November 2019 . Retrieved 15 November 2019 . ^ a b c d "World Economic Outlook Database, October 2023 Edition. (Kenya)" . IMF.org . International Monetary Fund . 22 April 2025. Archived from the original on 21 October 2023 . Retrieved 22 April 2025 . ^ "Gini index" . World Bank Group. 2019. Archived from the original on 15 June 2023 . Retrieved 17 October 2023 . ^ "Human Development Report 2025" (PDF) . United Nations Development Programme . 6 May 2025. Archived (PDF) from the original on 6 May 2025 . Retrieved 6 May 2025 . ^ a b c d Central Intelligence Agency (2012). "Kenya" . The World Factbook . Archived from the original on 24 January 2021 . Retrieved 28 May 2013 . ^ "Kenya" . Collins English Dictionary . HarperCollins . ^ "Kenya National Bureau of Statistics - Kenya's Top Data Site" . 23 December 2021 . Retrieved 11 January 2025 . ^ "African Hunter-Gatherers: Survival, History and Politics of Identity" (PDF) . repository.kulib.kyoto-u.ac.jp . Archived (PDF) from the original on 4 November 2018 . Retrieved 18 October 2021 . ^ "The East African Bushmen" . researchgate.net . Archived from the original on 9 January 2022 . Retrieved 18 October 2021 . ^ a b Ehret, C. (1983) Culture History in the Southern Sudan , J. Mack, P. Robertshaw, Eds., British Institute in Eastern Africa, Nairobi, pp. 19–48, ISBN 1-872566-04-9 . ^ "Wonders Of The African World" . pbs . Archived from the original on 19 October 2019 . Retrieved 18 October 2021 . ^ "Mombasa | History, Map, Location, Population, & Facts | Britannica" . www.britannica.com . 10 January 2025 . Retrieved 11 January 2025 . ^ "Victorian Electronic Democracy – Final Report – Table of ContentsVictorian Electronic Democracy – Final Report – Glossary" . 13 December 2007. Archived from the original on 13 December 2007 . Retrieved 29 January 2019 . ^ Robinson, Rebecca (27 April 2025). "One of Africa's 'richest' countries set to be overtaken by neighbour - £12bn more" . Express . Retrieved 29 April 2025 . ^ "GNI per capita, Atlas method (current US$) – Kenya" . worldbank.org . World Bank . Retrieved 29 April 2025 . ^ "East African Community" (PDF) . eala.org . Archived (PDF) from the original on 24 December 2023 . Retrieved 19 December 2023 . ^ "East African Federation" . eac.int . Archived from the original on 15 December 2023 . Retrieved 19 December 2023 . ^ Maxwell, Daniel, and Ben Watkins. "Humanitarian information systems and emergencies in the Greater Horn of Africa: logical components and logical linkages." Disasters 27.1 (2003): 72–90. ^ Mwangi S. Kimenyi; Francis M. Mwega; Njuguna S. Ndung'u (May 2016). "The African Lions: Kenya country case study" (PDF) . The Brookings Institution. Archived (PDF) from the original on 27 May 2016 . Retrieved 23 May 2016 . ^ a b Sullivan, Paul (2006). Kikuyu Districts . Dar es Salaam, Tanzania: Mkuki na Nyota Publishers. ^ "History" . Archived from the original on 26 May 2016 . Retrieved 13 May 2016 . ^ Krapf, Johann Ludwig (1860). Travels, Researches, and Missionary Labours in Eastern Africa . London: Frank Cass & Co. Ltd. ^ Krapf, Johann Ludwig (13 May 1850). "Extract from Krapf's diary". Church Missionary Intelligencer . i : 452. ^ Foottit, Claire (2006) [2004]. Kenya . The Brade Travel Guide. Bradt Travel Guides Ltd. ISBN 978-1-84162-066-4 . ^ Ratcliffe, B. J. (January 1943). "The Spelling of Kenya". Journal of the Royal African Society . 42 (166): 42– 44. JSTOR 717465 . ^ Glynn Llywelyn Isaac, Barbara Isaac (1977). Olorgesailie: archeological studies of a Middle Pleistocene lake basin in Kenya . University of Chicago Press. p. xiii. ISBN 978-0-226-38483-2 . Archived from the original on 15 April 2023 . Retrieved 26 March 2023 . ^ Chatterjee, Rhitu (15 March 2018). "Scientists Are Amazed By Stone Age Tools They Dug Up In Kenya" . NPR . Archived from the original on 15 March 2018 . Retrieved 15 March 2018 . ^ Yong, Ed (15 March 2018). "A Cultural Leap at the Dawn of Humanity – New finds from Kenya suggest that humans used long-distance trade networks, sophisticated tools, and symbolic pigments right from the dawn of our species" . The Atlantic . Archived from the original on 17 November 2020 . Retrieved 15 March 2018 . ^ Brooks AS, Yellen JE, Potts R, Behrensmeyer AK, Deino AL, Leslie DE, Ambrose SH, Ferguson JR, d'Errico F, Zipkin AM, Whittaker S, Post J, Veatch EG, Foecke K, Clark JB (2018). "Long-distance stone transport and pigment use in the earliest Middle Stone Age" . Science . 360 (6384): 90– 94. Bibcode : 2018Sci...360...90B . doi : 10.1126/science.aao2646 . ISSN 0036-8075 . PMID 29545508 . ^ a b Ehret, C. (2002) The Civilizations of Africa: a History to 1800 , University Press of Virginia, ISBN 0-8139-2085-X . ^ Ehret, C. (1980) The historical reconstruction of Southern Cushitic phonology and vocabulary , Kölner Beiträge zur Afrikanistik 5, Bd., Reimer, Berlin. ^ Ambrose, S.H. (1982). "Archaeological and linguistic reconstructions of history in East Africa." In Ehert, C., and Posnansky, M. (eds.), The archaeological and linguistic reconstruction of African history , University of California Press, ISBN 0-520-04593-9 . ^ Ambrose, S.H. (1986) Sprache und Geschichte in Afrika 7.2, 11. ^ Traditional occupations of indigenous and tribal peoples: Emerging trends . International Labour Organization. 2000. ISBN 9789221122586 . ^ Ehret, C. (1998) An African Classical Age : Eastern and Southern Africa in World History, 1000 B.C. to A.D. 400. , University Press of Virginia, Charlottesville, pp. xvii, 354, ISBN 0-8139-2057-4 . ^ a b Smith, C. Wayne (1995) Crop Production: Evolution, History, and Technology , John Wiley & Sons, p. 132, ISBN 0-471-07972-3 . ^ a b "Wonders of the African World" . PBS . Archived from the original on 1 March 2020 . Retrieved 16 April 2010 . ^ Brielle, E. S.; Fleisher, J.; Wynne-Jones, S.; et al. (2023). "Entwined African and Asian genetic roots of mediaeval peoples of the Swahili coast" . Nature . 615 (7954): 866– 873. Bibcode : 2023Natur.615..866B . doi : 10.1038/s41586-023-05754-w . PMC 10060156 . PMID 36991187 . ^ "History and Origin of Swahili – Jifunze Kiswahili" . swahilihub.com. Archived from the original on 21 June 2016 . Retrieved 17 July 2016 . ^ Nanjira, Daniel Don (2010). African Foreign Policy and Diplomacy from Antiquity to the 21st Century . ABC-CLIO. ISBN 9780313379826 . Archived from the original on 15 April 2023 . Retrieved 26 March 2023 . ^ Spear, Thomas (2000). "Early Swahili History Reconsidered". The International Journal of African Historical Studies . 33 (2): 257– 290. doi : 10.2307/220649 . JSTOR 220649 . ^ شاكر مصطفى, موسوعة دوال العالم الأسلامي ورجالها الجزء الثالث , (دار العلم للملايين: 1993), p. 1360 ^ Nicolini, Beatrice (1 January 2004). Makran, Oman, and Zanzibar: Three-Terminal Cultural Corridor in the Western Indian Ocean, 1799–1856 . BRILL. p. 62. ISBN 9789004137806 . Archived from the original on 18 May 2024 . Retrieved 26 March 2023 . ^ Gower, R.H. (April 1952). "Swahili Borrowings from English" . Africa . 22 (2): 154– 157. doi : 10.2307/1156242 . JSTOR 1156242 . S2CID 146513246 . Archived from the original on 13 August 2022 . Retrieved 13 August 2022 . ^ Alsayyad, Nezar (30 March 2001). Hybrid Urbanism . Greenwood Publishing Group. ISBN 978-0-275-96612-6 . Archived from the original on 18 May 2024 . Retrieved 26 March 2023 . ^ Ali, Shanti Sadiq (1996). The African Dispersal in the Deccan . Orient Blackswan. ISBN 978-81-250-0485-1 . [ permanent dead link ] ^ "PBS website" . PBS . 16 January 2001. Archived from the original on 8 October 2015 . Retrieved 12 October 2015 . ^ " Slavery (sociology) Archived 2 June 2015 at the Wayback Machine ". Encyclopædia Britannica Online. ^ Swahili Coast Archived 19 January 2018 at the Wayback Machine . National Geographic . ^ Ndeda, Mildred (2019). "Population movement, settlement and the construction of society to the east of Lake Victoria in precolonial times: the western Kenyan case" . The East African Review (52): 83– 108. doi : 10.4000/eastafrica.473 . S2CID 198396394 . Archived from the original on 13 August 2022 . Retrieved 13 August 2022 . ^ Beachey, R.W. (1967). "The East African Ivory Trade in the Nineteenth Century". The Journal of African History . 8 (2): 269– 290. doi : 10.1017/S0021853700007052 . S2CID 162882930 . ^ "Johannes Rebmann" . Encyclopædia Britannica (Online ed.). Archived from the original on 13 August 2022 . Retrieved 15 August 2022 . ^ a b c Encyclopædia Britannica ^ a b c d e R. Mugo Gatheru (2005) Kenya: From Colonization to Independence, 1888–1970 , McFarland, ISBN 0-7864-2199-1 ^ "Ismaili muslim" . Magicalkenya.com. Archived from the original on 3 January 2009 . Retrieved 16 April 2010 . ^ "We Want Our Country" . Time . 5 November 1965 ^ Firestone, Matthew (15 September 2010). Kenya . Lonely Planet Publications. p. 28. ISBN 9781742203553 . Archived from the original on 18 May 2024 . Retrieved 26 March 2023 . ^ a b Maloba, Wunyabari O. (1993) Mau Mau and Kenya: An Analysis of Peasant Revolt , Indiana University Press, 0852557450. ^ "Uncovering the brutal truth about the British empire" . The Guardian . 18 August 2016. Archived from the original on 1 June 2019 . Retrieved 22 November 2019 . ^ "Mau Mau" . Encyclopædia Britannica (Online ed.). Archived from the original on 13 August 2022 . Retrieved 15 August 2022 . ^ Anderson, David (2005). Histories of the Hanged: The Dirty War in Kenya and the End of Empire . London: Weidenfeld and Nicolson. ISBN 0-393-05986-3 . Archived from the original on 18 May 2024 . Retrieved 13 August 2022 . ^ Castagno, A. A. (1964). "The Somali-Kenyan Controversy: Implications for the Future". The Journal of Modern African Studies . 2 (2): 165– 188. doi : 10.1017/S0022278X00003980 . JSTOR 158817 . S2CID 154443409 . ^ "NORTHERN FRONTIER DISTRICT OF KENYA (Hansard, 3 April 1963)" . api.parliament.uk . Archived from the original on 15 October 2019 . Retrieved 31 December 2019 . ^ "Kenya, 1962: Enumeration Forms in English" (PDF) . Archived (PDF) from the original on 4 February 2019 . Retrieved 24 May 2020 . ^ a b "Commonwealth and Colonial Law" by Kenneth Roberts-Wray , London, Stevens, 1966. P. 762 ^ HC Deb 22 November 1963 vol 684 cc1329-400 wherein the UK Under-Secretary of State for Commonwealth Relations and for the Colonies stated: "An agreement was then signed on the 8th October 1963, providing that on the date when Kenya became independent the territories comprising the Kenya Coastal Strip would become part of Kenya proper." ^ Bruce Baker, Escape from Domination in Africa: Political Disengagement & Its Consequences , (Africa World Press: 2003), p.83 ^ Hogg, Richard (1986). "The New Pastoralism: Poverty and Dependency in Northern Kenya". Africa: Journal of the International African Institute . 56 (3): 319– 333. doi : 10.2307/1160687 . JSTOR 1160687 . S2CID 146312775 . ^ Howell, John (May 1968). "An Analysis of Kenyan Foreign Policy". The Journal of Modern African Studies . 6 (1): 29– 48. doi : 10.1017/S0022278X00016657 . JSTOR 158675 . S2CID 154605094 . ^ "Foreign Relations of the United States, 1969–1976, Volume E–6, Documents on Africa, 1973–1976 - Office of the Historian" . history.state.gov . Archived from the original on 26 March 2023 . Retrieved 26 March 2023 . ^ Kabukuru, Wanjohi (26 February 2015). "The Kenya-Ethiopia Defence Pact: Is Somalia a pawn?" . New African Magazine . Archived from the original on 26 March 2023 . Retrieved 26 March 2023 . ^ Permanent Mission of the Republic of Kenya to the United Nations (2002). "Kenya at the United Nations" . Consulate General of Kenya in New York. Archived from the original on 8 June 2009 . Retrieved 15 February 2010 . ^ Boone, Catherine (April 2012). "Land Conflict and Distributive Politics in Kenya" (PDF) . African Studies Review . 55 (1): 75– 103. doi : 10.1353/arw.2012.0010 . hdl : 2152/19778 . ISSN 0002-0206 . S2CID 154334560 . ^ Times, Charles Mohr Special to The New York (16 December 1973). "Kenya, 10 Years Independent, Emerges as a Model of Stability (Published 1973)" . The New York Times . Archived from the original on 27 November 2020 . Retrieved 19 November 2020 . ^ a b "Letters to the Editor (Published 1974)" . The New York Times . 16 January 1974. Archived from the original on 30 November 2020 . Retrieved 19 November 2020 . ^ "Amnesty International Annual Report 1973-1974. Available from" (PDF) . January 1974. Archived (PDF) from the original on 21 January 2021 . Retrieved 19 November 2020 . ^ Ndegwa, Stephen N. (1999). "Multi-Party Politics in Kenya: the Kenyatta and Moi States and the Triumph of the System in the 1992 Election (review)". Africa Today . 46 (2): 146– 148. doi : 10.1353/at.1999.0008 . ISSN 1527-1978 . S2CID 145810474 . ^ Society . Nyamora Communications Limited. 1992. p. 12. Archived from the original on 6 May 2023 . Retrieved 26 March 2023 . ^ "Wagalla massacre: Raila Odinga orders Kenya probe" . BBC. 11 February 2011. Archived from the original on 22 June 2014 . Retrieved 14 November 2013 . ^ Harden, Blaine (25 February 1988) Many Voters Stay Home as Kenya Drops Secret Ballot in Parliamentary Election , The Washington Post . ^ Moreno, Pedro C. (ed.). "Kenya" . Handbook on Religious Liberty Around the World . Charlottesville, VA: The Rutherford Institute. Archived from the original on 29 June 2010. ^ a b c Keith., Kyle (1999). Politics of the independence of Kenya . Macmillan. ISBN 978-0333720080 . OCLC 795968156 . ^ Goldsworthy, David (March 1982). "Ethnicity and Leadership in Africa: the 'Untypical' Case of Tom Mboya". The Journal of Modern African Studies . 20 (1): 107– 126. doi : 10.1017/s0022278x00000082 . ISSN 0022-278X . S2CID 154841201 . ^ a b "KENYA: parliamentary elections National Assembly, 1992" . archive.ipu.org . Archived from the original on 17 August 2018 . Retrieved 29 January 2019 . ^ "Clashes, elections and land – church keeps watch in Molo" . IRIN . 19 July 2007. Archived from the original on 17 December 2017 . Retrieved 29 January 2019 . ^ a b c "Kenya profile" . 31 January 2018. Archived from the original on 30 January 2019 . Retrieved 29 January 2019 . ^ "Kenya History Timeline – historic overview of Kenya, Africa" . Crawfurd Homepage . Archived from the original on 23 December 2018 . Retrieved 29 January 2019 . ^ a b Anderson, David M. (2003). "Kenya's Elections 2002 – The Dawning of a New Era?". African Affairs . 102 (407): 331– 342. doi : 10.1093/afraf/adg007 . ^ AfricaNews (25 October 2017). "A look at Kenya's elections history since independence in 1964" . Africanews . Archived from the original on 30 January 2019 . Retrieved 29 January 2019 . ^ "Of Oranges and Bananas: The 2005 Kenya Referendum on the Constitution" . CMI – Chr. Michelsen Institute . Archived from the original on 12 May 2016 . Retrieved 13 May 2016 . ^ "Deal to end Kenyan crisis agreed" . 12 April 2008. Archived from the original on 15 April 2008 . Retrieved 29 January 2019 . ^ "FACTBOX-East African common market begins" . Reuters . 1 July 2010. Archived from the original on 8 July 2010 . Retrieved 29 January 2019 . ^ "The Standard | Online Edition :: Somalia government supports Kenyan forces' mission" . 14 March 2012. Archived from the original on 14 March 2012 . Retrieved 29 January 2019 . ^ Koech, Dennis (25 July 2011). "Red Cross warns of catastrophe in Turkana" . Kbc.co.ke. Archived from the original on 4 January 2012 . Retrieved 7 August 2011 . ^ "Kenya: schools close as famine takes hold in Turkana" . Indcatholicnews.com. 28 July 2011. Archived from the original on 19 October 2011 . Retrieved 7 August 2011 . ^ Gettleman, Jeffrey (3 February 2012) U.N. Says Famine in Somalia Is Over, but Risks Remain Archived 7 November 2016 at the Wayback Machine . The New York Times . ^ "Supreme Court upholds Uhuru's election as president" . Daily Nation . Archived from the original on 30 January 2019 . Retrieved 29 January 2019 . ^ Burke, Jason (25 October 2017). "Kenya election rerun to go ahead after court fails to rule on delay" . The Guardian . ISSN 0261-3077 . Archived from the original on 28 January 2019 . Retrieved 29 January 2019 . ^ "Kenya court decision demonstrates respect for rule of law | IDLO" . idlo.int . September 2017. Archived from the original on 30 January 2019 . Retrieved 29 January 2019 . ^ Team, Standard. "President Uhuru Kenyatta declared winner of repeat presidential election" . The Standard . Archived from the original on 30 January 2019 . Retrieved 29 January 2019 . ^ Moore, Jina (30 October 2017). "President Uhuru Kenyatta declared winner of repeat presidential election" . The New York Times . Archived from the original on 25 July 2018 . Retrieved 29 January 2019 . ^ Wilson, Tom (1 November 2019). "Handshake ends crisis and leads to signs of progress in Kenya" . Financial Times . Archived from the original on 14 May 2021 . Retrieved 27 June 2021 . ^ "The Handshake that Shaped a Nation" . Kenya Connection . 31 May 2018. Archived from the original on 23 April 2021 . Retrieved 21 June 2021 . ^ a b c d e Omondi, Ferdinand: "Kenya's BBI blocked in scathing court verdict for President Kenyatta," Archived 14 May 2021 at the Wayback Machine 14 May 2021, BBC News (Africa), retrieved 14 May 2021 ^ a b c d e Miriri, Duncan: "Kenyan court slams brakes on president's constitutional changes," Archived 14 May 2021 at the Wayback Machine 13 May 2021, Reuters News Service , retrieved 14 May 2021 ^ "Kenyan court rejects disputed bid to change constitution" . Aljazeera . 20 August 2021. Archived from the original on 26 August 2021 . Retrieved 27 August 2021 . ^ "Kenya election result: William Ruto wins presidential poll" . BBC News . 15 August 2022. Archived from the original on 15 August 2022 . Retrieved 19 August 2022 . ^ Obulutsa, George; Mersie, Ayenat (13 September 2022). "William Ruto sworn in as Kenya's fifth president" . Reuters . Archived from the original on 5 October 2022 . Retrieved 13 September 2022 . ^ "Protests in Nairobi over Kenya government's tax hikes BBC News" . ^ Murayama, Yuji; Kamusoko, Courage; Yamashita, Akio; Estoque, Ronald C. (29 March 2017). Urban Development in Asia and Africa: Geospatial Analysis of Metropolises . Springer. ISBN 978-981-10-3241-7 . Archived from the original on 6 May 2023 . Retrieved 27 March 2023 . ^ Stokes, Jamie (2009). Encyclopedia of the Peoples of Africa and the Middle East . Infobase Publishing. ISBN 978-1-4381-2676-0 . Archived from the original on 15 April 2023 . Retrieved 27 March 2023 . ^ a b CIA (2010). The World Factbook . Potomac Books, Inc. p. 336. ISBN 978-1-59797-541-4 . ^ Salih, Mohamed (2012). Local Climate Change and Society . Routledge. p. 119. ISBN 9780415627153 . ^ Peck, Dannele E.; Peterson, Jeffrey M. (2015). Climate Variability and Water Dependent Sectors: Impacts and Potential Adaptations . Routledge. ISBN 978-1-317-61427-2 . ^ "Kenya climate: average weather, temperature, precipitation, best time" . climatestotravel.com . Archived from the original on 2 August 2020 . Retrieved 15 January 2020 . ^ Hausfather, Zeke; Peters, Glen (29 January 2020). "Emissions – the 'business as usual' story is misleading" . Nature . 577 (7792): 618– 20. Bibcode : 2020Natur.577..618H . doi : 10.1038/d41586-020-00177-3 . PMID 31996825 . ^ Schuur, Edward A.G.; Abbott, Benjamin W.; Commane, Roisin; Ernakovich, Jessica; Euskirchen, Eugenie; Hugelius, Gustaf; Grosse, Guido; Jones, Miriam; Koven, Charlie; Leshyk, Victor; Lawrence, David; Loranty, Michael M.; Mauritz, Marguerite; Olefeldt, David; Natali, Susan; Rodenhizer, Heidi; Salmon, Verity; Schädel, Christina; Strauss, Jens; Treat, Claire; Turetsky, Merritt (2022). "Permafrost and Climate Change: Carbon Cycle Feedbacks From the Warming Arctic" . Annual Review of Environment and Resources . 47 : 343– 371. doi : 10.1146/annurev-environ-012220-011847 . Medium-range estimates of Arctic carbon emissions could result from moderate climate emission mitigation policies that keep global warming below 3°C (e.g., RCP4.5). This global warming level most closely matches country emissions reduction pledges made for the Paris Climate Agreement... ^ Phiddian, Ellen (5 April 2022). "Explainer: IPCC Scenarios" . Cosmos . Archived from the original on 20 September 2023 . Retrieved 30 September 2023 . "The IPCC doesn't make projections about which of these scenarios is more likely, but other researchers and modellers can. The Australian Academy of Science , for instance, released a report last year stating that our current emissions trajectory had us headed for a 3°C warmer world, roughly in line with the middle scenario. Climate Action Tracker predicts 2.5 to 2.9°C of warming based on current policies and action, with pledges and government agreements taking this to 2.1°C. ^ a b c "Climate Change Profile: Kenya – Kenya" . ReliefWeb . Retrieved 24 November 2020 . ^ "Agricultural Sector Transformation and Growth Strategy" (PDF) . Ministry of Agriculture Livestock and Fisheries . 2019. p. 20. Archived from the original (PDF) on 10 December 2020 . Retrieved 8 December 2020 . ^ Climate Change in Kenya focus on Children (PDF) (Report). UNICEF. ^ Salih, Abubakr A. M.; Baraibar, Marta; Mwangi, Kenneth Kemucie; Artan, Guleid (July 2020). "Climate change and locust outbreak in East Africa" . Nature Climate Change . 10 (7): 584– 585. Bibcode : 2020NatCC..10..584S . doi : 10.1038/s41558-020-0835-8 . ISSN 1758-678X . S2CID 220290864 . ^ "Wildebeest Migration" . National Geographic Society . 19 January 2012. Archived from the original on 12 June 2016 . Retrieved 13 May 2016 . ^ Bashir, Hanif (27 May 2015). "Masai Mara Safari – The Migration | Tour Packages" . Kenya Travel Tips . Archived from the original on 2 March 2021 . Retrieved 3 March 2021 . ^ Pflanz, Mike (13 June 2010). "New road threatens Africa's 'wonder of the world' wildebeest migration" . Daily Telegraph . ISSN 0307-1235 . Archived from the original on 15 January 2020 . Retrieved 15 January 2020 . ^ Grantham, H. S.; Duncan, A.; Evans, T. D.; Jones, K. R.; Beyer, H. L.; Schuster, R.; Walston, J.; Ray, J. C.; Robinson, J. G.; Callow, M.; Clements, T.; Costa, H. M.; DeGemmis, A.; Elsen, P. R.; Ervin, J.; Franco, P.; Goldman, E.; Goetz, S.; Hansen, A.; Hofsvang, E.; Jantz, P.; Jupiter, S.; Kang, A.; Langhammer, P.; Laurance, W. F.; Lieberman, S.; Linkie, M.; Malhi, Y.; Maxwell, S.; Mendez, M.; Mittermeier, R.; Murray, N. J.; Possingham, H.; Radachowsky, J.; Saatchi, S.; Samper, C.; Silverman, J.; Shapiro, A.; Strassburg, B.; Stevens, T.; Stokes, E.; Taylor, R.; Tear, T.; Tizard, R.; Venter, O.; Visconti, P.; Wang, S.; Watson, J. E. M. (2020). "Anthropogenic modification of forests means only 40% of remaining forests have high ecosystem integrity – Supplementary Material" . Nature Communications . 11 (1): 5978. Bibcode : 2020NatCo..11.5978G . doi : 10.1038/s41467-020-19493-3 . ISSN 2041-1723 . PMC 7723057 . PMID 33293507 . ^ Novak, Andrew. "The Criminal Justice System and Eroding Democracy After Independence – Page 12" . racism.org . Archived from the original on 3 June 2016 . Retrieved 13 May 2016 . ^ "Corruption Perceptions Index 2019" . transparency.org . Transparency International . 24 January 2020. Archived from the original on 12 May 2020 . Retrieved 20 February 2020 . ^ "Business Corruption in Kenya" . Business Anti-Corruption Portal. Archived from the original on 6 April 2014 . Retrieved 4 April 2014 . ^ A short history of the 2010 Kenya constitution Archived 30 October 2012 at the Wayback Machine . kenyaconstitution.org ^ "International observers declare Kenyan elections fair" . cbc.ca . Archived from the original on 30 May 2016 . Retrieved 13 May 2016 . ^ "The Turning Point: Free Primary Education in Kenya – NORRAG" . norrag.org . Archived from the original on 4 February 2021 . Retrieved 21 December 2020 . ^ "Africa | Free secondary schools for Kenya" . BBC News . 11 February 2008. Archived from the original on 3 December 2012 . Retrieved 26 February 2013 . ^ "Kenya president signs tough 'anti-terror' law" . Al Jazeera. 19 December 2014. Archived from the original on 22 December 2014 . Retrieved 22 December 2014 . ^ Kenya – Foreign Relations Archived 23 April 2016 at the Wayback Machine . Retrieved on 16 January 2015. ^ "Opinion of the United States" . Pewglobal.org. 22 June 2006. Archived from the original on 5 April 2019 . Retrieved 17 July 2016 . ^ Epatko, Larisa, "Why Obama Is Visiting Senegal, South Africa and Tanzania But Not Kenya" Archived 21 January 2014 at the Wayback Machine , PBS NewsHour , 25 June 2013. Retrieved 18 August 2013. ^ a b Raghavan, Sudarsan, "In snub to Washington, Kenyan president visits China, Russia first" Archived 29 November 2014 at the Wayback Machine , Washington Post , 17 August 2013. Ambassador Liu's comments at capitalfm.co.ke linked to capitalfm.co.ke Archived 18 August 2013 at the Wayback Machine . Retrieved 18 August 2013. ^ George Kegoro. "Circumstances created need that made visit possible" . Nation.co.ke. Archived from the original on 28 August 2016 . Retrieved 17 July 2016 . ^ " Britain's secret killing fields Archived 6 August 2019 at the Wayback Machine ". The Guardian . 1 July 2001 ^ "The British Army in Africa" . army.mod.uk/ . Ministry of Defence. Archived from the original on 30 June 2016 . Retrieved 20 June 2016 . ^ Ministry of Defence. "Kenya Defence Forces Act – No. 25 of 2012" . National Council for Law Reporting. Archived from the original (PDF) on 3 October 2018 . Retrieved 6 May 2014 . ^ "Commission of Inquiry into the Post Election Violence" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 20 December 2008. ^ "Kenya National Commission on Human Rights" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 14 February 2012. ^ Security men accused of torture and rape Archived 3 July 2017 at the Wayback Machine Daily Nation. 11 January 2008. ^ The Standard 31 October 2010 Activists give military 5 days to re-admit recruit INTERNET standardmedia.co.ke [ permanent dead link ] Cited on 3 January 2011 ^ The Standard Sh 1.6 billion tender rocks the DoD INTERNET standardmedia.co.ke Cited on 3 January 2011 ^ For example the decision to acquire ex-Jordanian F5 fighter aircraft. See The Standard Kenya's 'new' fighter jets cannot take off INTERNET standardmedia.co.ke [ permanent dead link ] Cited on 3 January 2011 ^ Kenya Roads Board Constituency funding under the RMLF ^ "Laws on Homosexuality in African Nations" . Library of Congress . 2015. Archived from the original on 19 June 2017 . Retrieved 3 June 2017 . ^ Poushter, Jacob; Kent, Nicholas (25 June 2020). "The Global Divide on Homosexuality Persists" . Pew Research Center. Archived from the original on 1 July 2022 . Retrieved 6 August 2022 . ^ Scott, Holmes, Eugene, Kristen (25 July 2017). "Obama lectures Kenyan president on gay rights" . CNN. Archived from the original on 15 May 2020 . Retrieved 24 April 2020 . {{ cite news }} : CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) ^ " 'The Cry of Blood' — Report on Extra-Judicial Killings and Disappearances" (PDF) . Kenya National Commission on Human Rights /Enforced Disappearances Information Exchange Center. 25 September 2008. Archived from the original on 14 December 2010 . Retrieved 29 December 2010 . ^ "Was extra-judicial killing of Eastleigh 'thugs' justified? Kenyans divided » Capital News" . 1 April 2017. Archived from the original on 19 June 2017 . Retrieved 29 June 2017 . ^ "Kenyan Economy – The National Treasury" . Archived from the original on 28 February 2024 . Retrieved 28 February 2024 . ^ "Foreign direct investment (FDI) in Kenya - International Trade Portal" . www.lloydsbanktrade.com . Archived from the original on 28 February 2024 . Retrieved 28 February 2024 . ^ Ludeki Chweya, John Kithome Tuta & S. Kichamu Akivaga 2005 . ^ "Multidimensional Poverty Index 2023: Kenya" (PDF) . United Nations Development Programme . 2023 . Retrieved 20 December 2024 . ^ "Doing Business in Kenya – World Bank Group" . doingbusiness.org . Archived from the original on 10 September 2018 . Retrieved 14 January 2017 . ^ a b c d e "Country Profile: Kenya" (PDF) . Federal Research Division . Library of Congress. June 2007. Archived (PDF) from the original on 5 May 2015 . Retrieved 23 April 2011 . ^ a b "Food Assistance Fact Sheet – Kenya" . USAID . Archived from the original on 10 June 2016 . Retrieved 13 May 2016 . ^ Fengler, Wolfgang (5 December 2012). "Kenya Economic Update" . The World Bank . Archived from the original on 9 March 2013 . Retrieved 29 May 2013 . ^ https://kenyainnovationweek.com/ ^ "Kenya Innovation Week 2024 Africa Edition" . ^ "Diaspora remittances now Kenya's largest foreign exchange earner" . The East African . 20 January 2023. Archived from the original on 27 February 2024 . Retrieved 27 February 2024 . ^ "Kenya Tourism Board" . KTB.go.ke . Archived from the original on 19 February 2017 . Retrieved 2 March 2017 . ^ "Kenya Law: January 2017" . KenyaLaw.org . Archived from the original on 5 August 2013 . Retrieved 2 March 2017 . ^ "Drought leaves two million Kenyans in need of food aid" . United Nations World Food Programme . 26 April 2005. Archived from the original on 14 August 2016 . Retrieved 5 August 2016 . ^ Pigeonpea in Eastern and Southern Africa Archived 18 July 2014 at the Wayback Machine . ICRISAT Posted 10 October 2012. Downloaded 26 January 2014. ^ Towards Achieving Food Security in Kenya Archived 26 January 2012 at the Wayback Machine . Joseph Kinyua, Permanent Secretary, Ministry of Agriculture, Kenya; 1 April 2004, Kampala, Uganda ^ Republic of Kenya, Ministry of Water and Irrigation (2009) National Irrigation and Drainage Policy :3–4. ^ a b c Veselinovic, Milena (16 March 2015). "Got roses this Valentine's Day? They probably came from Kenya" . CNN. Archived from the original on 14 July 2016 . Retrieved 17 July 2016 . ^ "Cement production keeps pace with growing demand" . Construction Business Review . 5 September 2015. Archived from the original on 13 May 2016 . Retrieved 13 May 2016 . ^ "Kenya: Employers' organizations taking the lead on linking the informal sector to formal Kenyan enterprises" . ilo.org . 2 August 2005. Archived from the original on 5 June 2016 . Retrieved 13 May 2016 . ^ "Jua Kali sector plays key role in economic development and job creation" . MyGov . 13 November 2015. Archived from the original on 10 June 2016 . Retrieved 13 May 2016 . ^ Kamau, Pithon. "Industry" . Brand Kenya Board . Archived from the original on 4 June 2016 . Retrieved 13 May 2016 . ^ "Kenya" . Archived from the original on 3 August 2020 . Retrieved 10 June 2016 . ^ "How to get rich in the 21st century" . The Economist . 2 January 2024. ISSN 0013-0613 . Archived from the original on 3 January 2024 . Retrieved 3 January 2024 . ^ Electricity in Kenya Archived 2018-08-11 at the Wayback Machine . IEA 2014 ^ "Peak Demands – Summary of Electricity Sub Sector Statistics" . Kenya Ministry of Energy. Archived from the original on 7 December 2019 . Retrieved 11 November 2019 . ^ "Kenya plans nuclear plant by 2027" . The East African . 5 December 2017. Archived from the original on 27 December 2017 . Retrieved 26 December 2017 . ^ McGregor, Sarah (20 September 2010) Kenya Aims to Build a Nuclear Power Plant by 2017 Archived 15 November 2013 at the Wayback Machine . Bloomberg L.P. ^ Kenya From Nowhere Plans East Africa's First Oil Exports: Energy Archived 25 July 2014 at the Wayback Machine . Bloomberg L.P. ^ Kenya plans strategic oil reserve . Reuters (10 November 2011). ^ Jackson Okoth; Philip Mwakio (14 February 2014). "Standard Digital News : : Business – Kenya joins mineral exporters as first titanium cargo leaves port" . Standard Digital News . Archived from the original on 28 January 2015 . Retrieved 15 February 2015 . ^ Shem Oirere (23 October 2014). "Construction of Kenyan standard-gauge line suspended" . Archived from the original on 29 January 2015 . Retrieved 15 February 2015 . ^ NEWS: Kenya's National Climate Change Action Plan is officially launched Archived 14 May 2013 at the Wayback Machine , Climate & Development Knowledge Network, 28 March 2013 ^ "Kenya Climate Change Country Profile" . climatelinks.org . Archived from the original on 31 December 2021 . Retrieved 14 April 2022 . ^ BBC News – Kenya oil discovery after Tullow Oil drilling Archived 18 March 2018 at the Wayback Machine . BBC. 26 March 2012. ^ Barber, Lionel; England, Andrew (10 August 2006). "China's scramble for Africa finds a welcome in Kenya" . Financial Times . Archived from the original on 13 May 2010 . Retrieved 27 June 2008 . ^ a b Kimeu, Caroline (30 May 2023). "After a plastic bag ban, Kenya takes another shot at its pollution problem" . The Guardian . ISSN 0261-3077 . Archived from the original on 18 May 2024 . Retrieved 6 October 2023 . ^ "World Bank Open Data" . World Bank Open Data . Archived from the original on 26 May 2023 . Retrieved 5 March 2024 . ^ "Kenya beats sub-Saharan Africa peers in World Bank global human capital index" . Business Daily . 21 December 2020. Archived from the original on 1 April 2024 . Retrieved 5 March 2024 . ^ "Kenya" . MFI Upgrading and Rating Initiative of the Development Bank of Austria . Archived from the original on 3 June 2013 . Retrieved 25 September 2015 . ^ Saylor, Michael (2012). The Mobile Wave: How Mobile Intelligence Will Change Everything . Perseus Books/Vanguard Press. p. 202; 304. ISBN 978-1593157203 . ^ Tavneet Suri, and, William Jack (2016). "The Long-run Poverty and Gender Impacts of Mobile Money". Science . 354 (6317): 1288– 1292. Bibcode : 2016Sci...354.1288S . doi : 10.1126/science.aah5309 . PMID 27940873 . S2CID 42992837 . ^ "World Population Prospects 2022" . United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs , Population Division . Retrieved 17 July 2022 . ^ "World Population Prospects 2022: Demographic indicators by region, subregion and country, annually for 1950-2100" (XSLX) ("Total Population, as of 1 July (thousands)"). United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs , Population Division . Retrieved 17 July 2022 . ^ " Why a new president may slow population growth Archived 15 February 2009 at the Wayback Machine ". The Christian Science Monitor . 14 January 2008. ^ Zinkina J.; Korotayev A. (2014). "Explosive Population Growth in Tropical Africa: Crucial Omission in Development Forecasts (Emerging Risks and Way Out)" . World Futures . 70 (2): 120– 139. CiteSeerX 10.1.1.691.8612 . doi : 10.1080/02604027.2014.894868 . S2CID 53051943 . Archived from the original on 9 January 2022 . Retrieved 11 January 2020 . ^ " Exploding population Archived 15 July 2014 at the Wayback Machine ". The New York Times . 7 January 2008. ^ Karanja, Muchiri (3 September 2010). "Myth shattered: Kibera numbers fail to add up" . Daily Nation . Archived from the original on 6 December 2018 . Retrieved 4 September 2010 . ^ "World Water Day Focus on Global Sewage Flood" . National Geographic . 22 March 2010. Archived from the original on 15 January 2012 . Retrieved 10 February 2012 . ^ The UN Refugee Agency Archived 23 December 2011 at the Wayback Machine . Unhcr.org. ^ Balaton-Chrimes, Samantha (2020). "Who are Kenya's 42(+) tribes? The census and the political utility of magical uncertainty" . Journal of Eastern African Studies . 15 : 43– 62. doi : 10.1080/17531055.2020.1863642 . ISSN 1753-1055 . S2CID 231681524 . ^ a b Asongu, J. J.; Marr, Marvee (2007). Doing Business Abroad: A Handbook for Expatriates . Greenview Publishing Co. pp. 12 & 112. ISBN 978-0-9797976-3-7 . ^ Peak Revision K.C.P.E. Social Studies . East African Publishers. ISBN 9789966254504 . ^ Proquest Info & Learning (COR) (2009). Culturegrams: World Edition . p. 98. ISBN 978-0-9778091-6-5 . ^ Brown, E. K.; Asher, R. E.; Simpson, J. M. Y. (2006). Encyclopedia of language & linguistics, Volume 1, Edition 2 . Elsevier. p. 181. ISBN 978-0-08-044299-0 . ^ Nyaggah, Lynette Behm. "Cross-linguistic influence in Kenyan English: The impact of Swahili and Kikuyu on syntax" . University of California. Archived from the original on 26 December 2016 . Retrieved 8 August 2014 . ^ Derek Nurse, Gérard Philippson (2006). Bantu Languages . Routledge. p. 197. ISBN 978-1-135-79683-9 . Archived from the original on 3 August 2016 . Retrieved 20 October 2014 . ^ Languages of Kenya Archived 23 November 2012 at the Wayback Machine . Ethnologue.com. ^ "2019 Kenya Population and Housing Census Volume III: Distribution of Population by Age and Sex" . Kenya National Bureau of Statistics . Archived from the original on 2 August 2020 . Retrieved 8 April 2020 . ^ Address data base of Reformed churches and institutions Archived 3 April 2013 at the Wayback Machine . Reformiert-online.net. Retrieved 16 April 2013. ^ The World Reformed Fellowship – Promoting Reformed Partnerships Worldwide – News . Wrfnet.org. Retrieved 16 April 2013. ^ "Kenya" . Oikoumene.org. 3 February 2008. Archived from the original on 11 March 2008 . Retrieved 26 February 2013 . ^ Samuel, Bill. "World Distribution of Quakers, 2012 - QuakerInfo.com" . quakerinfo.com . Archived from the original on 17 January 2019 . Retrieved 24 December 2018 . ^ "Kenya: International Religious Freedom Report 2008" . U.S. Department of State . 2008. Archived from the original on 19 April 2010 . Retrieved 16 April 2010 . ^ "AIC Mission Hospital Kapsowar Official Website" . Archived from the original on 28 June 2019. ^ Sectoral Perspectives on Corruption in Kenya: The Case of Public Health Care Delivery (PDF) , Kenya Anti-Corruption Commission, February 2010, archived (PDF) from the original on 19 January 2023 , retrieved 16 February 2023 ^ UNICEF Statistics: Kenya Archived 4 June 2019 at the Wayback Machine . Unicef.org. ^ Infant Mortality ranks Archived 2 August 2020 at the Wayback Machine . The World Factbook ^ "WHO Health-Related Millennium Development Goals Report 2011" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 17 June 2012. ^ Poverty Incidence in Kenya Declined Significantly, but Unlikely to be Eradicated by 2030 . Archived from the original on 26 March 2023 . Retrieved 26 March 2023 . ^ CIA World Factbook: HIV/AIDS – Adult Prevalence Rate Rankings Archived 29 March 2019 at the Wayback Machine . Cia.gov. Retrieved 23 April 2012. ^ World AIDS Day Report 2011 Archived 1 June 2013 at the Wayback Machine . UNAIDS ^ "Kenya" Archived 28 February 2021 at the Wayback Machine , pp. 111–113 in World Malaria report 2009 . WHO. ^ Makori, Linet; Gichana, Haggray; Oyugi, Elvis; Nyale, George; Ransom, James (2021). "Tuberculosis in an urban hospital setting: Descriptive epidemiology among patients at Kenyatta National Hospital TB clinic, Nairobi, Kenya" . International Journal of Africa Nursing Sciences . 15 . doi : 10.1016/j.ijans.2021.100308 . ^ "Global Hunger Index Scores by 2024 GHI Rank" . Global Hunger Index (GHI) - peer-reviewed annual publication designed to comprehensively measure and track hunger at the global, regional, and country levels . Retrieved 20 December 2024 . ^ "IFs Forecast – Version 7.00 – Google Public Data Explorer" . Archived from the original on 7 April 2015 . Retrieved 15 February 2015 . ^ Kenya – Kenya Demographic and Health Survey 2008–09 Archived 2 January 2019 at the Wayback Machine . Kenya National Data Archive (KeNADA) ^ "WHO – Female genital mutilation and other harmful practices" . Archived from the original on 29 October 2010 . Retrieved 15 February 2015 . ^ Boseley, Sarah (8 September 2011). "FGM: Kenya acts against unkindest cut" . The Guardian . London. Archived from the original on 17 June 2017 . Retrieved 7 January 2012 . ^ a b c "Women's participation in the kenyan society" (PDF) . Center for International Private Enterprise . Archived from the original (PDF) on 11 January 2011 . Retrieved 2 February 2018 . ^ "Demographic and Health Survey 2014" (PDF) . Kenya National Bureau of Statistics . Archived (PDF) from the original on 3 April 2019 . Retrieved 2 February 2018 . ^ a b "MAKING JUSTICE WORK FOR WOMEN Kenya Country Report" (PDF) . Sydney eScholarship Repository . Archived (PDF) from the original on 3 February 2018 . Retrieved 2 February 2018 . ^ "Const2010" . kenyalaw.org . Archived from the original on 7 June 2018 . Retrieved 25 February 2022 . ^ "Out of 47.6 million Kenyans, 35.7 million are under the age of 35" . Citizen Digital . 21 February 2020. Archived from the original on 7 February 2022 . Retrieved 25 February 2022 . ^ a b D.G, Kabata. "Why youth unemployment problem require more than a strait jacket solution" . The Standard . Archived from the original on 25 February 2022 . Retrieved 25 February 2022 . ^ "Youth Enterprise Development Fund" . Archived from the original on 16 March 2022 . Retrieved 25 February 2022 . ^ "Women Enterprise Fund – Kenya – 50 Million African Women Speak" . womenconnect.org . Archived from the original on 25 February 2022 . Retrieved 25 February 2022 . ^ "Kikao Mtaani" . youth.go.ke . Archived from the original on 25 February 2022 . Retrieved 25 February 2022 . ^ "The Uwezo Fund – A flagship programme for vision 2030" . Archived from the original on 25 February 2022 . Retrieved 25 February 2022 . ^ "Home | Future Bora Innovation Challenge" . Future Bora . Archived from the original on 25 February 2022 . Retrieved 25 February 2022 . ^ PLC, Standard Group. "studio mashinani" . The Standard . Archived from the original on 25 February 2022 . Retrieved 25 February 2022 . ^ Reporter, Standard. "Government to review Early Childhood Development policy" . Standard Digital News . Archived from the original on 22 August 2016 . Retrieved 23 June 2016 . ^ a b "Primary School Education in Kenya" . kenyapage.net . Archived from the original on 12 April 2017 . Retrieved 10 June 2016 . ^ "Literacy rate, adult total (% of people ages 15 and above) – Kenya | Data" . data.worldbank.org . Archived from the original on 28 January 2021 . Retrieved 22 January 2021 . ^ "Literacy rate, adult total (% of people ages 15 and above) – Sub-Saharan Africa | Data" . data.worldbank.org . Archived from the original on 16 April 2021 . Retrieved 22 January 2021 . ^ World Intellectual Property Organization (2024). Global Innovation Index 2024: Unlocking the Promise of Social Entrepreneurship . World Intellectual Property Organization. p. 18. doi : 10.34667/tind.50062 . ISBN 978-92-805-3681-2 . Retrieved 6 October 2024 . {{ cite book }} : |website= ignored ( help ) ^ Africa in China's 21st Century: In Search of a Strategy . Independently published. 3 December 2017. ISBN 978-1973456803 . ^ On the Beat – Tapping the Potential of Kenya's Music Industry Archived 3 November 2011 at the Wayback Machine , WIPO Magazine (July 2007). ^ a b IAAF: Changes of Allegiance 1998 to 2005 [ usurped ] ^ Mynott, Adam (20 May 2005). "Kenya examines track star defections" . BBC News . Archived from the original on 17 April 2016 . Retrieved 10 June 2016 . ^ "Furious Kenyans threaten to defect over taxes" . Reuters . 22 January 2014. Archived from the original on 5 August 2016 . Retrieved 10 June 2016 . ^ "Why the defections?" . mobile.nation.co.ke . Archived from the original on 18 August 2016 . Retrieved 10 June 2016 . ^ "Kenya women's volleyball caps three decades of excellence | Kenya Page Blog" . kenyapage.net . 20 June 2015. Archived from the original on 12 June 2016 . Retrieved 10 June 2016 . ^ "Volleyball: Champions Kenya Scoop Major Continental Awards |" . chimpreports.com . 21 June 2015. Archived from the original on 3 August 2016 . Retrieved 10 June 2016 . ^ ":: Cricket Kenya" . cricketkenya.co.ke . Archived from the original on 28 March 2016 . Retrieved 10 June 2016 . ^ "Kenya win Singapore Sevens title" . SuperSport . 17 April 2016. Archived from the original on 21 June 2016 . Retrieved 10 June 2016 . ^ "Kenya beat Fiji to win their first Sevens World Series title" . BBC Sport . Archived from the original on 20 April 2016 . Retrieved 10 June 2016 . ^ Sport, Telegraph (17 April 2016). "HSBC World Rugby Sevens Series: Kenya shock Fiji and win maiden title in Singapore" . The Telegraph . Archived from the original on 19 June 2016 . Retrieved 10 June 2016 . ^ New Vision, 3 June 2004: Wrangles land Kenya indefinite FIFA ban Archived 10 January 2008 at the Wayback Machine ^ The Auto Channel, 21 July 2001: FIA RALLY: Delecour takes points finish on Safari Rally debut Archived 10 December 2007 at the Wayback Machine ^ 1993 FIBA Africa Championship for Men Archived 8 October 2017 at the Wayback Machine , ARCHIVE.FIBA.COM. Retrieved 24 January 2016. ^ Color of Hockey: Kenya Ice Lions ready to roar Archived 27 May 2022 at the Wayback Machine – NHL ^ Hockey visit to Kenya Archived 27 May 2022 at the Wayback Machine – IIHF ^ Solar Ice Rink Archived 7 July 2022 at the Wayback Machine – The Panari Hotel ^ "Kenyan skaters flock to East Africa's first ice rink" . The Mail & Guardian . 25 December 2005. ^ "Fast food finds fans in sub-Sahara Africa, where obesity problem is growing" . NBC News . 24 October 2012. Archived from the original on 16 January 2013 . Retrieved 26 February 2013 . ^ US fast food chain to open first Kenya outlet in August – Money Markets Archived 23 October 2018 at the Wayback Machine . businessdailyafrica.com. Retrieved 9 August 2013. ^ "Restaurants in Nairobi, Kenya - Yellow Pages Online Directory" . yellowpageskenya.com . Archived from the original on 27 April 2023 . Retrieved 27 April 2023 . ^ Kenyans are gradually loving cheese Archived 14 November 2017 at the Wayback Machine , africanews.com, 4 September 2016. ^ Entrepreneur grows her hobby into a successful cheese making business Archived 14 November 2017 at the Wayback Machine , howwemadeitinafrica.com, 23 August 2013. Sources and further reading Ndemo, Bitange; Weiss, Tim, eds. (2017). Digital Kenya: An Entrepreneurial Revolution in the Making . Springer Nature . ISBN 9781137578808 . Ludeki Chweya; John Kithome Tuta; S. Kichamu Akivaga (2005), Control of Corruption in Kenya: Legal-political Dimensions , The University of Michigan , p. 259, ISBN 978-9966-915-55-9 Mwaura N (2005). Kenya Today: Breaking the Yoke of Colonialism in Africa . Algora Publishing. p. 238. ISBN 9780875863214 . External links Kenya at Wikipedia's sister projects Definitions from Wiktionary Media from Commons News from Wikinews Quotations from Wikiquote Texts from Wikisource Textbooks from Wikibooks Resources from Wikiversity Travel information from Wikivoyage Official website of the Parliament of Kenya Wikimedia Atlas of Kenya Kenya . The World Factbook . Central Intelligence Agency . Kenya profile from Africa.com Kenya Corruption Profile from the Business Anti-Corruption Portal World Bank Summary Trade Statistics Kenya , 2010 v t e Kenya articles History Timeline Wanga Kingdom Indian Ocean slave trade East Africa Protectorate Uganda Railway Kenya Colony In World War II Ilemi Triangle Kenya African Union Mau Mau rebellion 1963 Constitution 1982 coup d'état attempt Goldenberg scandal 1992 Elections 2007–2008 crisis 2010 referendum 2013 Elections Geography Biosphere reserves Climate Ecoregions Environmental issues Great Rift Valley Lakes Mountains Protected areas Rivers Volcanoes Wildlife World Heritage Sites Subdivisions Cities Counties Politics Constitution Elections Foreign relations Government Human rights Intersex LGBT rights Judiciary Law enforcement Military Parliament Building Political parties President list Deputy President Prime Minister (defunct) Economy Agriculture Central bank Coffee Energy Real Estate Shilling (currency) Telecommunications Tourism Transport Society Child marriage Corruption Crime Demographics Education Health Human trafficking Languages Polygamy Prostitution Religion Squatting Water supply and sanitation Women Culture Anthem Cinema Coat of arms English Engsh Flag Names Literature Media Museums Music Public holidays Sports Sheng Swahili Video gaming Outline Index Category Portal v t e Countries and territories of Africa Sovereign states Algeria Angola Benin Botswana Burkina Faso Burundi Cameroon Cape Verde Central African Republic Chad Comoros Democratic Republic of the Congo Republic of the Congo Djibouti Egypt (partly in Asia) Equatorial Guinea Eritrea Eswatini Ethiopia Gabon The Gambia Ghana Guinea Guinea-Bissau Ivory Coast Kenya Lesotho Liberia Libya Madagascar Malawi Mali Mauritania Mauritius Morocco Mozambique Namibia Niger Nigeria Rwanda São Tomé and Príncipe Senegal Seychelles Sierra Leone Somalia South Africa South Sudan Sudan Tanzania Togo Tunisia Uganda Zambia Zimbabwe States with limited recognition Sahrawi Arab Democratic Republic ( unclear sovereignty ) Somaliland Dependent territories France Îles Éparses United Kingdom Saint Helena, Ascension and Tristan da Cunha African territories fully part of non-African states France Mayotte Réunion Italy Pantelleria Pelagie Islands Portugal Madeira Savage Islands Spain Canary Islands Ceuta Melilla Plazas de soberanía Yemen Socotra Category Africa portal Articles related to Kenya v t e First- and second-level administrative divisions of Kenya 47 counties (since March 2013) Baringo (30) Bomet (36) Bungoma (39) Busia (40) Elgeyo-Marakwet (28) Embu (14) Garissa (07) Homa Bay (43) Isiolo (11) Kajiado (34) Kakamega (37) Kericho (35) Kiambu (22) Kilifi (03) Kirinyaga (20) Kisii (45) Kisumu (42) Kitui (15) Kwale (02) Laikipia (31) Lamu (05) Machakos (16) Makueni (17) Mandera (09) Marsabit (10) Meru (12) Migori (44) Mombasa (01) Murang'a (21) Nairobi (47) Nakuru (32) Nandi (29) Narok (33) Nyamira (46) Nyandarua (18) Nyeri (19) Samburu (25) Siaya (41) Taita-Taveta (06) Tana River (04) Tharaka-Nithi (13) Trans-Nzoia (26) Turkana (23) Uasin Gishu (27) Vihiga (38) Wajir (08) West Pokot (24) Principal cities and towns Nairobi (capital) Athi River Baragoi Bomet Bungoma Busia Chuka Eldoret Embu Garissa Hola Homa Bay Isiolo Iten Kabarnet Kajiado Kakamega Kapsabet Kangundo - Tala Kapenguria Karuri Kericho Kerugoya Kiambu Kibwezi Kikuyu Kilifi Kisii Kisumu Kitale Kitengela Kitui Kwale Limuru Lodwar Lokichogio Loiyangalani Lamu Machakos Makindu Malindi Mandera Maralal Marsabit Masii Meru Mombasa Moyale Mtito Andei Mumias Murang'a Mutomo Mwingi Naivasha Nakuru Namanga Nanyuki Narok Nyahururu Nyamira Nyeri Ol Kalou Ongata Rongai Ruiru Siaya Thika Vihiga Voi Wajir Webuye Wote Wundanyi v t e Years in Kenya (1963–present) 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 1990 1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 1980 1981 1982 1983 1984 1985 1986 1987 1988 1989 1970 1971 1972 1973 1974 1975 1976 1977 1978 1979 Pre-1963 1963 1964 1965 1966 1967 1968 1969 v t e Members of the Commonwealth of Nations Sovereign states (members) Antigua and Barbuda Australia Bahamas Bangladesh Barbados Belize Botswana Brunei Cameroon Canada Cyprus Dominica Eswatini (Swaziland) Fiji Gabon Gambia Ghana Grenada Guyana India Jamaica Kenya Kiribati Lesotho Malawi Malaysia Maldives Malta Mauritius Mozambique Namibia Nauru New Zealand Nigeria Pakistan Papua New Guinea Rwanda Saint Kitts and Nevis Saint Lucia Saint Vincent and the Grenadines Samoa Seychelles Sierra Leone Singapore Solomon Islands South Africa Sri Lanka Tanzania Togo Tonga Trinidad and Tobago Tuvalu Uganda United Kingdom Vanuatu Zambia Associated states Cook Islands Niue Dependent territories Australia Ashmore and Cartier Islands Australian Antarctic Territory Christmas Island Cocos (Keeling) Islands Coral Sea Islands Heard Island and McDonald Islands Norfolk Island New Zealand Ross Dependency Tokelau United Kingdom Akrotiri and Dhekelia Anguilla Bermuda British Antarctic Territory British Indian Ocean Territory British Virgin Islands Cayman Islands Falkland Islands Gibraltar Guernsey Isle of Man Jersey Montserrat Pitcairn Islands Saint Helena, Ascension and Tristan da Cunha South Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands Turks and Caicos Islands Source: Commonwealth Secretariat – Member Countries v t e Countries and regions in the Somali plate Countries Comoros Eswatini Kenya Madagascar Mauritius Mozambique Seychelles Somalia Somaliland Tanzania Uganda Regions KwaZulu-Natal (South Africa) Mayotte (France) Réunion (France) Socotra (Yemen) Somali Region (Ethiopia) v t e African Union History Pan-Africanism Decolonisation of Africa Union of African States Casablanca Group Monrovia Group African and Malagasy Union Abuja Treaty Sirte Declaration Lome Summit Organisation of African Unity Chairperson Secretary General Geography Borders Extreme points Member states Regions Organs Executive Council Permanent Representatives' Committee Specialized Technical Committees Assembly Chairperson Commission Chairperson Deputy Chairperson AUCC 2025 election Pan-African Parliament Bureau Secretariat Gallagher Estate African Court of Justice African Court on Human and Peoples' Rights ECOSOCC Committees Department of Education, Science, Technology and Innovation Department of Political Affairs, Peace and Security Department of Infrastructure and Energy Department of Health, Humanitarian Affairs and Social Development HR, Sciences and Technology Department of Agriculture, Rural Development, and Blue Economy Department of Economic Development, Trade, Tourism, Industry, Mining Cross-Cutting Programs Financial institutions African Central Bank African Monetary Fund African Investment Bank Peace and Security Council ACIRC African Standby Force Panel of the Wise UNAMID AMIB AMIS AMISOM MISCA Specialised agencies and institutions Africa Centres for Disease Control and Prevention African Civil Aviation Commission African Energy Commission Afripol African Space Agency Politics APRM Foreign relations African Charter on Human and Peoples' Rights African Commission on Human and Peoples' Rights Enlargement United States Africa Command ( United States military bases ) United States ambassadors African Union–Ethiopia relations Symbols Anthem Emblem Flag Passport Economy Currencies ( Gold standard ) Development Bank African Economic Community NEPAD African Continental Free Trade Area Single African Air Transport Market Trans-African Highway network Culture Africa Day African Border Day Theory Afro Federal Africa United States of Latin Africa East African Federation Category v t e Nations in the Group of 15 (G-15) Summits 1990 1991 1992 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2004 2006 2010 2012 Members Algeria Argentina Brazil Chile Egypt India Indonesia Iran Jamaica Kenya Malaysia Mexico Nigeria Senegal Sri Lanka Venezuela Zimbabwe v t e Countries and territories bordering the Indian Ocean Africa Comoros Djibouti Egypt Eritrea France Mayotte Réunion Kenya Madagascar Mauritius Mozambique Seychelles Somalia Somaliland South Africa Sudan Tanzania Asia Bahrain Bangladesh British Indian Ocean Territory United Kingdom Christmas Island (Australia) Cocos (Keeling) Islands (Australia) India Indonesia Iran Iraq Israel Jordan Kuwait Malaysia Maldives Myanmar Oman Pakistan Qatar Saudi Arabia Singapore Sri Lanka Thailand Timor-Leste United Arab Emirates Yemen Other Antarctica Australian Antarctic Territory French Southern and Antarctic Lands Heard Island and McDonald Islands Australia Geographic locale Lat. and Long. 1°16′S 36°48′E ﻿ / ﻿ 1.267°S 36.800°E ﻿ / -1.267; 36.800 (Nairobi) Languages v t e English-speaking world English speaking countries Further links Articles English-speaking world History of the English language British Empire English in the Commonwealth of Nations Anglosphere Lists List of countries by English-speaking population List of countries where English is an official language Countries and territories where English is the national language or the native language of the majority Africa Saint Helena, Ascension and Tristan da Cunha Americas Anguilla Antigua and Barbuda The Bahamas Barbados Belize Bermuda British Virgin Islands Canada Cayman Islands Dominica Falkland Islands Grenada Guyana Jamaica Montserrat Saba Saint Kitts and Nevis Saint Lucia Saint Vincent and the Grenadines Sint Eustatius Sint Maarten South Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands Trinidad and Tobago Turks and Caicos Islands United States United States Virgin Islands Europe Guernsey Ireland Isle of Man Jersey United Kingdom Oceania Australia New Zealand Norfolk Island Pitcairn Islands Countries and territories where English is an official language, but not the majority first language Africa Botswana Cameroon Eswatini The Gambia Ghana Kenya Lesotho Liberia Malawi Mauritius Namibia Nigeria Rwanda Sierra Leone Somaliland South Africa South Sudan Sudan Tanzania Uganda Zambia Zimbabwe Americas Puerto Rico Asia Christmas Island Cocos (Keeling) Islands Hong Kong India Pakistan Philippines Singapore Europe Gibraltar Akrotiri and Dhekelia Malta Oceania American Samoa Cook Islands Fiji Guam Kiribati Marshall Islands Micronesia Nauru Niue Northern Mariana Islands Palau Papua New Guinea Samoa Solomon Islands Tokelau Tuvalu Vanuatu Dependencies shown in italics . Portals : Kenya Geography Africa Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Australia Czech Republic Spain Sweden Israel Geographic MusicBrainz area Artists KulturNav People UK Parliament Other IdRef Historical Dictionary of Switzerland NARA Encyclopedia of Modern Ukraine İslâm Ansiklopedisi 1°N 38°E ﻿ / ﻿ 1°N 38°E ﻿ / 1; 38 Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Kenya&oldid=1289192589 " Categories : Kenya Republics in the Commonwealth of Nations Countries and territories where English is an official language G15 nations Member states of the African Union Member states of the Commonwealth of Nations Member states of the United Nations East African countries States and territories established in 1963 Swahili-speaking countries and territories 1963 establishments in Africa Countries in Africa Hidden categories: Articles containing Swahili (macrolanguage)-language text All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from February 2023 Articles with permanently dead external links Webarchive template wayback links Articles with dead external links from December 2017 CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list CS1: unfit URL CS1 errors: periodical ignored Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Wikipedia pages semi-protected against vandalism Use Kenyan English from January 2022 All Wikipedia articles written in Kenyan English Use dmy dates from December 2019 Articles containing explicitly cited English-language text Wikipedia articles scheduled for update tagging All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from February 2024 Wikipedia articles needing clarification from December 2019 Articles with excerpts Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2005 All articles containing potentially dated statements Articles containing potentially dated statements from May 2011 Articles with unsourced statements from March 2023 Articles needing additional references from December 2020 All articles needing additional references Articles with unsourced statements from October 2024 Pages using Sister project links with hidden wikidata Pages using Sister project links with default search Official website different in Wikidata and Wikipedia Coordinates on Wikidata This page was last edited on 7 May 2025, at 01:34 (UTC) . Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc. , a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Kenya 267 languages Add topicSecond Looks and Second Chances | Cardozo Law Review Toggle navigation Home About Us Mastheads Alumni Prospective Members Pod Curiam Issues de•novo Events Bauer Lecture Symposium Event Photos Submissions Second Looks and Second Chances by Shon Hopwood Volume 41 Issue 1 In early January of 2019, the improbable case of Matthew Charles ended with an NBC Nightly News team recording his release from federal custody, after Matthew had served two stints in federal prison totaling more than twenty-one years. [1] Matthew was in prison because, at the age of thirty, he was sentenced to thirty-five years in federal court for distributing 216 grams of crack cocaine and illegally possessing a firearm. [2] Matthew’s sentence resulted, not from the quantity of crack cocaine he distributed, but from his ugly criminal history that included: “kidnapping a woman on two consecutive days ‘for the purpose of terrorizing her’; burglarizing a home; and fleeing from a police interrogation, shooting a man in the head, and attempting to run off in the victim’s car.” [3] When Matthew was sentenced, the sentencing judge explained that Matthew had “a particularly violent history” and had “demonstrated by his actions that he’s a danger to society and should simply be off the streets.” [4] But what the judge did not foresee was that Matthew would change. In the more than twenty-one years Matthew spent in prison, he never received a single disciplinary infraction. [5] Matthew studied the Bible during religious services and the law while working as a law clerk in the prison law library. He received an education through college courses. [6] And his focus wasn’t just on himself: he drafted legal filings for illiterate prisoners and explained to them the court orders issued in their cases. [7] When he wasn’t helping illiterate prisoners understand the law, he was teaching GED classes. [8] Matthew was determined to change his character, and he embarked on what the judge who resentenced him many years later called “exemplary rehabilitation.” [9] In 2016, District Court Judge Kevin Sharp resentenced Matthew under a retroactive U.S. Sentencing Guideline provision and reduced the sentence by nine years. [10] Matthew was released from federal custody after serving twenty-one years, and he did everything that we want from those coming out of prison. He quickly found a job and reestablished a connection with his family. He made community connections through his new church. And despite the fact that the first two years of release are typically chaotic for those reentering society after serving long prison sentences, [11] Matthew selflessly volunteered his weekend time at a soup kitchen for the homeless called the Little Pantry That Could. [12] Matthew was out of custody for nearly two years without incident, and in that time, he continuously contributed to his Nashville community. But those contributions were brought to a halt. The Department of Justice (DOJ) appealed Matthew’s release, and the Court of Appeals for the Sixth Circuit reversed Judge Sharp’s resentencing order. [13] By the time the Court reversed, Judge Sharp had resigned because he couldn’t, in good conscience, continue to impose draconian mandatory minimum sentences. [14] Matthew’s case went to Judge Aleta Trauger, who was required to reimpose the additional nine years of imprisonment. Before doing so, Judge Trauger asked U.S. Attorney Donald Cochran to provide Holloway relief [15] and vacate the charges, thereby releasing Matthew from having to serve over nine additional years in prison. But Mr. Cochran declined the invitation to exercise his discretion and vacate the charges. Citing Matthew’s long and violent criminal history, he concluded that Matthew’s case was not “unjust or unique in the way that Holloway’s case arguably was.” [16] Matthew returned to federal custody in May of 2018. While in custody, he lost his job and apartment, was separated from his girlfriend, and was uprooted from the community that he had built. Things seemed hopeless. [17] Then in December of 2018, Congress passed, and President Donald J. Trump signed, the First Step Act. [18] Among other things, the Act created a mechanism for prisoners who had been sentenced for crack cocaine offenses to apply for resentencing, where changes to sentencing provisions created under the Fair Sentencing Act of 2010 would be retroactively applicable to their sentences. [19] Mariah Wooten and Michael Holley, the federal defenders representing Matthew, filed a motion for resentencing under Section 404 of the First Step Act. The U.S. Attorney’s office agreed that Matthew was eligible for resentencing and that he should be resentenced to time served. [20] Judge Trauger also agreed. [21] Matthew was released and reunited with his Nashville community. Matthew’s case remained in the national consciousness after President Trump made him a guest of honor at the State of the Union address. [22] “Matthew is the very first person to be released from prison under the First Step Act,” President Trump said. [23] “Thank you Matthew. Welcome home.” [24] Matthew now serves as a criminal justice fellow at FAMM, [25] and he has met with multiple members of Congress and state governors while advocating for justice reform. Matthew’s case is one of the few that I’ve seen receive universal condemnation; many believed it was a travesty that Matthew had to be uprooted from his job and family to return to prison, after having been out of custody without incident for nearly two years. [26] Matthew proved that he had changed, but the law simply failed to recognize his transformation, and no amount of proof prevented Matthew from having to return to prison. The only difference between Matthew and the thousands of federal prisoners who, through their own hard work and determination, have also been rehabilitated is that Matthew received the chance to prove his transformation for two years after Judge Sharp released him. Many others are not so fortunate. They are serving long federal sentences, even though they have been rehabilitated and would not be a threat to the public if released. Our system asks too much of prosecutors, probation officers, and federal judges to determine at the front-end, during charging and sentencing decisions, which defendants will remain a danger and are unredeemable. The judge who sentenced Matthew certainly believed a thirty-five-year sentence was necessary to incapacitate him. It is hard to second guess that decision, given Matthew’s violent criminal history and blatant disregard for the law at the time. [27] What decisionmakers can’t measure at sentencing, however, is the capacity for people to change. The data tells us that many young men and women age out of crime. [28] And stories like that of Alice Marie Johnson—who had her life without parole sentence commuted to time served by President Trump after compiling a remarkable record of rehabilitation—illustrate that people who commit serious crimes can change and be redeemed. [29] Because it is often difficult to conclude which defendants have the capacity for rehabilitation and redemption at the time of sentencing, we need avenues for decisionmakers in the federal criminal justice system to take a second look in individual cases. There are several avenues for decisionmakers—whether courts, Congress, federal prosecutors, or the President—to identify people who are serving needlessly long sentences and are no longer a danger to society. With that in mind, I propose in this Essay how each decisionmaker in the federal criminal justice system can find the people like Matthew Charles and Alice Marie Johnson and give them a second look for a second chance at a new life outside of prison. Part I of this Essay explains why second looks have historically been available in the federal criminal justice, and why reducing the sentences of those in federal prison who are no longer a danger to society is normatively desirable. The following Sections address individual actors in the criminal justice system and the means by which they can provide a second look for those no longer needing to be incapacitated. Part II addresses federal judges who have the power to reduce sentences for extraordinary and compelling reasons under the compassionate release statute. Part III addresses Congress’s role in legislating a second look provision that could apply in all cases, even those that don’t present extraordinary and compelling reasons. Part IV addresses the role of federal prosecution in identifying injustices and explains how prosecutors can remedy the injustice of punitive punishments through Holloway relief. Part V concludes with the role of the President in granting second looks through the commutations of sentences under the executive clemency powers. Second Looks Have a Long Historical Pedigree and Are a Worthwhile Policy Goal As will be explained below, a federal second look provision allows a federal court, prosecutor, or the President (i.e., a “decisionmaker”) to identify people like Matthew Charles or Alice Marie Johnson and then reduce their sentences, sometimes to time served. There Is a Long History of Second Look Provisions in the Federal Justice System A second look at reducing the sentence of someone who violated the criminal law has deep roots in American law. English common law included the power to pardon people for their offenses. [30] That pardon practice was adopted by early American colonies, although its power varied among them. [31] The Founders adopted the pardon practice wholesale, enshrining it in Article II, Section 2, Clause 1 of the Constitution. In Federalist Nos. 69 and 74, Alexander Hamilton argued for a robust pardon power residing with the President. [32] Hamilton’s arguments were successful, and there was little debate over the Clause during ratification. [33] Those in federal government during the founding understood the importance of establishing an avenue for mercy within the federal criminal justice system. Hamilton argued that the pardon power constituted an act of “mercy” [34] that was a necessary check on the criminal justice system. [35] Chief Justice John Marshall echoed that the President’s pardon power “is an act of grace, proceeding from the power entrusted with the execution of the laws, which exempts the individual, on whom it is bestowed, from the punishment the law inflicts for a crime he has committed.” [36] Parole also has a long history in federal law. In 1910, Congress passed the first federal parole law, which allowed any prisoner serving a term of one year or longer to move for parole after they had completed one-third of their sentence. [37] By 1930, Congress created a single Board of Parole with three full-time members who were appointed by the Attorney General. [38] Parole became such a popular fixture in American law that it was “in the criminal justice system of every state and the federal government for most of the twentieth century.” [39] Second look provisions were also codified into federal rules of practice and various statutes. In 1946, a second look provision was codified in the first version of Federal Rule of Criminal Procedure 35(b), which allowed a court to reduce a sentence for any reason within sixty days of its imposition. [40] In 1976, Congress enacted a compassionate release statute as part of the Parole Reorganization Act, and it provided that courts could reduce a sentence for various reasons. [41] And in 1984, Congress created the current Compassionate Release Statute that provides for a sentence reduction if “extraordinary and compelling reasons” are present. [42] These second look provisions were in use when the federal criminal justice system was relatively small, both in the number of federal statutes carrying criminal penalties and in the number of people confined in federal prisons. But the federal criminal justice system is no longer small. In 1873, the federal criminal code was limited to just 183 separate offenses. [43] The criminal code now contains over 4,500 statutes, and it’s estimated that there are over 300,000 federal regulations containing criminal penalties. [44] The federal prison population has also increased exponentially. For most of its history, the Federal Bureau of Prisons (“BOP”) held few prisoners, and, as recently as 1980, the BOP held just 24,640 people in custody. [45] But by 2017, the federal prison population had bloated to 185,617 prisoners. [46] If second looks were widespread and needed when our incarceration rates were low, they are needed even more now in the age of overcriminalization and mass incarceration. Providing a Second Chance to Those Who Are Deserving Comes with a Number of Benefits [47] When a decisionmaker reduces the sentence of an individual who was overly sentenced and is rehabilitated, the decisionmaker can lower the chance that person will recidivate upon release. Several studies have concluded that more prison time doesn’t equal more success; longer terms of imprisonment do not reduce the likelihood of reoffending. [48] According to some criminologists, one reason for the outcome is that offenders are more present-oriented than the average person and therefore discount potential long-term adverse consequences of their actions. [49] Long sentences of incarceration can actually increase crime because incarceration is criminogenic, meaning that it increases the probability a person will engage in future crimes. [50] This criminogenic effect is not surprising. Incarceration in federal prison confines people in horrific prison conditions away from their community and surrounds them by others who have committed serious crimes. [51] As a result, federal prison often incubates and encourages anti-social behavior. In addition, a person who serves a long sentence may be unable to adapt to a changing society, especially technological change, upon release. [52] And due to serving a long sentence, prisoners’ ties to family and friends may be severed, leaving them vulnerable if they live paycheck-to-paycheck and should lose their job. If someone loses their employment and has no community to fall back on, the only choice might appear to be homelessness and crime. In my experience working with those who have reentered society after serving a long sentence, when people are put to the choice of homelessness or crime, that is often when people recidivate. Reducing the sentences of people who have received excessively punitive punishments and who have demonstrated rehabilitation can thus improve public safety. Second looks can also be used to fix race-based sentencing disparities in federal sentencing. There is no question that racial disparities exist. Professors Sonja B. Starr and M. Marit Rehavi concluded that black men are 1.75 times more likely to be charged by federal prosecutors with crimes carrying mandatory minimum penalties. [53] The U.S. Sentencing Commission came to the same conclusion about racial disparities in federal sentencing, finding that black men received 19.1% longer sentences for the same federal crimes as white men between fiscal years 2012 and 2016. [54] Second look provisions would allow federal judges to consider whether a person received a disparate punishment on the basis of race and would give judges the ability to ameliorate the disparity through a sentence reduction. Second look provisions leading to sentencing reductions can also alleviate the suffering of prisoners’ family members. “The families of incarcerated individuals suffer great economic hardships from incarceration, ranging from lost wages from the incarcerated individual to the costs of prison visits and calls, which can be crushing for families already living on the edge of subsistence.” [55] The children of prisoners are particularly affected by having a parent incarcerated for a significant amount of time. Children of incarcerated parents run greater risks of health and psychological problems, and lower economic well-being and educational attainment. [56] One study estimated that children of incarcerated parents are, on average, six times more likely to become incarcerated themselves, [57] leading to vicious cycles of intergenerational incarceration. The longer a parent is incarcerated, the risk of that punishment being visited upon their children increases exponentially. By reducing the sentences of those who are rehabilitated, decisionmakers can also reduce the BOP’s population and, concomitantly, its budget. From 1980 to 2017, the federal prison population increased from 24,640 to 185,617—more than a 653% increase. [58] That enormous increase added to the BOP’s ever-growing budget. [59] That budget has expanded so much that it has begun “crowding out” other DOJ priorities, [60] such as hiring additional federal law enforcement officers to investigate and prosecute lawbreakers—an avenue for deterring crime that might be more effective than the threat of long sentences of which many Americans are unaware. [61] Reducing a sentence for those who have already been sufficiently punished or who have demonstrated rehabilitation is also consistent with the goals of federal sentencing. The overarching goal of federal sentencing is to impose “a sentence sufficient, but not greater than necessary,” to comply with the purposes of sentencing. [62] But finding this happy medium is far from a perfect science. If a person is rehabilitated or has been overly sentenced, their sentence is greater than necessary to “protect the public from further crimes of the defendant.” [63] At the moment of sentencing, what can seem a sufficient but not greater than necessary sentence can, with hindsight and a record of the prisoner’s rehabilitation, appear overly punitive and unnecessary. Viable second look remedies would also improve the federal prison system. [64] If second looks became the norm, those in federal prison would be incentivized to start compiling a record of rehabilitation, including compliance with BOP rules and norms. As a result, federal prison would become less violent for both prisoners and staff alike. [65] Consequently, the BOP might be able to assign fewer correctional officers to police prisoners, and provide more staffing for educational, behavioral health, and mental health programs that could work to rehabilitate those in prison, thereby helping to ensure a lower recidivism rate when people are released from prison and return to their community. One objection is that reducing a sentence of someone whose conviction and sentence are final diminishes the “deterrence to criminal conduct.” [66] General deterrence theory posits that sentencing someone to a long prison sentence will deter someone else from committing a similar, or any other, crime. [67] But does general deterrence work? And even if general deterrence is effective, would it have lessened utility if people knew there was a chance that a decisionmaker could reduce a sentence under some form of a second look at some point during their incarceration? [68] As to the first question, economists and scholars are increasingly clear that there is “little convincing evidence that at today’s margins in the US, increasing the frequency or length of sentences deters aggregate crime.” [69] The reasons are unsurprising. Most people are unaware of the vast scope of federal criminal law, including over 4,500 statutes and several hundred thousand federal regulations containing criminal penalties. [70] Nor are most Americans aware of the punishments contained in the United States Code or U.S. Sentencing Guidelines generally, let alone the punishment for a particular crime. One cannot be deterred by a punishment of which they are unaware. [71] Even if people were aware, many people who commit crimes don’t act rationally, especially if they are in the throes of substance abuse disorder or other mental health ailments. [72] So they might not respond in rational ways to a steep punishment, even if aware of it. If general deterrence from long sentences is unlikely to work in its pristine state, then it is highly dubious that, when policymakers reduce a sentence through a second look provision, the reduction will have a meaningful impact in reducing the marginal deterrent effect. Put differently, assuming someone was deterred from witnessing a court impose a thirty-five-year sentence on Matthew Charles, would they be less deterred from committing a federal crime generally, or a crack cocaine offense specifically, knowing that Matthew’s sentence was given a second look and he was freed after spending twenty-two years in prison? I have my doubts. General deterrence is not a sufficient reason to preclude second looks for those who were overly sentenced and rehabilitated. Americans should value providing second chances to those who have been convicted of crimes. The great promise of the American dream is that with hard work, determination, and some good luck, people can reinvent themselves and find upward mobility. Second chances should not be denied to those who, through hard work and self-reflection, become rehabilitated and, if given a second chance, could become contributing and law-abiding citizens. As President George W. Bush noted during the 2004 State of the Union address, “America is the land of second chance, and when the gates of the prison open, the path ahead should lead to a better life.” [73] Second look avenues can open those prison gates and remedy long sentences that are far greater than necessary to keep the public safe. The next Sections address how individual decisionmakers can take a second look at sentences that are final. Federal Judges Can Reduce Sentences for People Whose Cases Present “Extraordinary or Compelling Reasons” under the Compassionate Release Statute in 18 U.S.C. § 3582(c)(1)(A)(i) Under current law, federal judges are limited in the ways that they can consider and reduce a sentence once a final judgment is imposed. One way that judges can modify a sentence is through the Compassionate Release Statute under 18 U.S.C. § 3582(c), which is often used to resentence someone who is terminally ill. [74] But with the changes made to the Compassionate Release Statute by the recently enacted First Step Act, courts can use the Compassionate Release Statute as a second look provision in cases that present “extraordinary and compelling reasons.” [75] The History of Second Look Compassionate Release and Its Expanding Development The Compassionate Release Statute was originally enacted as part of the Parole Reorganization Act of 1976. [76] Codified at 18 U.S.C. § 4205(g), it read as follows: At any time upon motion of the Bureau of Prisons, the court may reduce any minimum term to the time the defendant has served. The court shall have jurisdiction to act upon the application at any time and no hearing shall be required. Importantly, the § 4205(g) remedy of a sentence reduction was not limited in scope to mere medical issues. In United States v. Diaco , a district court reduced a sentence upon motion of the BOP and U.S. Attorney. [77] The court noted that Diaco had been “a model prisoner,” and the court reduced his five-year sentence based on sentencing disparities between Diaco and his more culpable co-defendants, who had only served six months imprisonment. [78] In United States v. Banks , the BOP Director had filed a motion for a sentence reduction, arguing that Banks, who was serving time for armed robbery, had “outstanding institutional adjustment,” and “[h]is conduct record is clear and his work uniformly competent.” [79] The district court granted the motion in the face of the U.S. Attorney’s office argument against the BOP’s recommendation “because of the serious nature of Mr. Banks’ offense.” [80] Section 4205(g) was thus used to correct and reduce long sentences where a person in prison showed a demonstrated record of rehabilitation, and this was the Compassionate Release Statute Congress was familiar with when it enacted the modern Compassionate Release Statute. Congress was no doubt aware that compassionate release could be used as a second look provision when, as part of the Comprehensive Crime Control Act of 1984, it enacted the modern form of the Compassionate Release Statute contained in 18 U.S.C. § 3582. [81] When statutory language “is obviously transplanted from . . . other legislation,” courts usually have reason to think “it brings the old soil with it.” [82] Enacted in 1984, § 3582(c) states that a district court can modify even a final “term of imprisonment” in four situations, the broadest of which is directly relevant here. [83] A sentencing court can reduce a sentence whenever “extraordinary and compelling reasons warrant such a reduction.” [84] And just like the 1976 compassionate release provision, Congress in 1984 conditioned the reduction of sentences on the BOP Director filing an initial motion in the sentencing court; absent such a motion, sentencing courts had no authority to modify a prisoner’s sentence for extraordinary and compelling reasons. Congress never defined what constitutes an “extraordinary and compelling reason” for resentencing under § 3582(c). [85] But the legislative history gives an indication of how Congress thought the statute should be employed by federal courts. One of Congress’s initial goals in passing the Comprehensive Crime Control Act was to abolish federal parole and create a “completely restructured guidelines sentencing system.” [86] Yet, recognizing that parole historically played a key role in responding to changed circumstances, the Senate Committee stressed how some individual cases may still warrant a second look at resentencing: The Committee believes that there may be unusual cases in which an eventual reduction in the length of a term of imprisonment is justified by changed circumstances. These would include cases of severe illness, cases in which other extraordinary and compelling circumstances justify a reduction of an unusually long sentence , and some cases in which the sentencing guidelines for the offense of which the defender was convicted have been later amended to provide a shorter term of imprisonment. [87] Rather than having the Parole Commission review every federal sentence focused only on an offender’s rehabilitation, Congress‌ decided‌ that‌ § 3582(c)‌ would enable courts to decide, in individual cases, if “there is justification for reducing a term of imprisonment.” [88] Congress intended for § 3582(c) to act as a “‘safety valve[ ]’ for modification of sentences,” [89] enabling sentence reductions when justified by various factors that previously could be addressed through the (now abolished) parole system. The safety valve would “assure the availability of specific review and reduction of a term of imprisonment for ‘extraordinary and compelling reasons’ and [would allow courts] to respond to changes in the guidelines.” [90] Noting that this approach would keep “the sentencing power in the judiciary where it belongs,” rather than with a federal parole board, the statute permitted “later review of sentences in particularly compelling situations .” [91] Congress thus intended to give federal sentencing courts an equitable power that, unlike parole, would be employed on an individualized basis to correct fundamentally unfair sentences. And there is no indication that Congress limited the compassionate release safety valve to medical or elderly release; if extraordinary and compelling circumstances were present, it could be used to “justify a reduction of an unusually long sentence.” [92] The U.S. Sentencing Commission has also concluded that § 3582(c)(1)(A)’s “extraordinary and compelling reasons” for compassionate release are not limited to medical, elderly, or family circumstances. Congress initially delegated the responsibility for determining what constitutes “extraordinary and compelling reasons” to the Commission. [93] Congress provided only one limitation to that delegation of authority: “[r]ehabilitation of the defendant alone shall not be considered an extraordinary and compelling reason.” [94] Congress no doubt limited the ability of rehabilitation alone to constitute extraordinary circumstances, so that sentencing courts could not use it as a full and direct substitute for the abolished parole system. Congress, however, contemplated that rehabilitation could be considered with other extraordinary and compelling reasons sufficient to resentence people in individual cases. Indeed, the use of the modifier “alone” signifies that rehabilitation could be used in tandem with other factors to justify a reduction. The Commission initially neglected its duty, leaving the BOP to fill the void and create the standards for extraordinary and compelling reasons that warrant resentencing. [95] The Commission finally acted in 2007, promulgating a policy that extraordinary and compelling reasons includes medical conditions, age, family circumstances, and “other reasons.” [96] After a negative DOJ Inspector General report [97] found that the BOP had rarely moved courts for compassionate release even under their own policies, the Commission amended its policy to encourage the BOP to file motions for compassionate release more often. [98] The Commission created several categories of qualifying reasons: (A) “Medical Conditions of the Defendant,” including terminal illness and other serious conditions and impairments; (B) “Age of the Defendant,” for those sixty-five and older with serious deterioration related to aging who have completed at least ten years or seventy-five percent of the term of imprisonment; (C) “Family Circumstances,” where a child’s caregiver or spouse dies or becomes incapacitated without an alternative caregiver; and (D) “Other Reasons,” when the Director of the BOP determines there is “an extraordinary and compelling reason other than, or in combination with, the reasons described in subdivisions (A) through (C).” [99] The Commission also clarified that the extraordinary and compelling reasons “need not have been unforeseen at the time of sentencing in order to warrant a reduction in the term of imprisonment.” [100] So even if an “extraordinary and compelling reason reasonably could have been known or anticipated by the sentencing court, [that fact] does not preclude consideration for a [sentence] reduction . . . .” [101] Consistent with the text and legislative history of § 3582(c), the Commission concluded that reasons beyond medical, age, and family circumstances could qualify as “extraordinary or compelling reasons” for resentencing, and that the extraordinary or compelling reasons need not be based on changed circumstances occurring after the initial sentencing of the defendant. Although the Commission concluded that other reasons could exist for sentence reductions, the BOP set the criteria for when federal prisoners could seek resentencing. Prior to Congress passing the First Step Act, the process for compassionate relief under § 3582(c)(1)(A) was set as follows: the Commission set the criteria for resentencing relief, and the BOP Director initiated and filed a motion in the sentencing court. [102] If such a motion was filed, the sentencing court could then decide if the reduction was justified by “extraordinary and compelling reasons” and was “consistent with applicable policy statements issued by the Sentencing Commission.” [103] Even if a federal prisoner qualified under the Commission’s definition of extraordinary and compelling reasons, without the BOP Director filing a motion, the sentencing court had no authority to reduce the sentence, and the prisoner was unable to secure a sentence reduction. This process meant that, practically, the BOP Director both initiated the process and set the criteria for whatever federal prisoner’s circumstances the Director decided to move upon. [104] Leaving the BOP Director with ultimate authority to trigger and set the criteria for sentence reductions created several problems. [105] The Office of the Inspector General found that, among many other issues, the BOP failed to provide adequate guidance to staff regarding the criteria for compassionate release, and that the BOP had no timeliness standards for reviewing compassionate release requests. [106] As a result of these problems and others, the Officer of the Inspector General concluded that: “[t]he BOP does not properly manage the compassionate release program, resulting in inmates who may be eligible candidates for release not being considered.” [107] Congress heard those complaints. In late 2018, Congress passed the First Step Act, part of which transformed the process for compassionate release. [108] Section 603 of the First Step Act changed the process by which compassionate release occurs so that, instead of depending upon the BOP Director to move for release, a court can now resentence “upon motion of the defendant,” if the defendant has fully exhausted all administrative remedies, “or the lapse of 30 days from the receipt of such a request by the warden of the defendant’s facility, whichever is earlier.” [109] Once a defendant who has properly exhausted all administrative remedies files a motion, a court may, after considering the 18 U.S.C. § 3553(a) sentencing factors, resentence a defendant, if the court finds that extraordinary and compelling reasons warrant a reduction. [110] Any reduction of a sentence that a court orders must also be “consistent with applicable policy statements issued by the Sentencing Commission.” [111] The effects of these new changes are to allow federal judges the ability to move on a prisoner’s compassionate release application even in the face of BOP opposition or its failure to respond to a prisoner’s request for compassionate release in a timely manner. Congress made these changes in an effort to expand the use of compassionate release sentence reductions. Congress labeled these changes, “Increasing the Use and Transparency of Compassionate Release.” [112] Senator Cardin noted in the congressional record that the First Step made several reforms to the federal prison system, including that: “The bill expands compassionate release under the Second Chance Act and expedites compassionate release applications.” [113] In the House, Representative Nadler noted that the First Step Act included “a number of very positive changes, such as . . . improving application of compassionate release , and providing other measures to improve the welfare of federal inmates.” [114] Federal judges now have the power to order reductions of sentences. Both the statutory text, context, and legislative history from 1984 make plain that Congress intended compassionate release to act as a second look provision to replace the abolishment of federal parole. With the First Step Act, Congress made a mere procedural change, intending for the judiciary to take on the role that the BOP once held under the pre-First Step Act Compassionate Release Statute to be the essential adjudicator of compassionate release requests. But Congress also intended for courts to grant sentence reductions on the full array of grounds reasonably encompassed by the “extraordinary and compelling” standard set forth in the applicable statute and guidelines policy statements. The statutory text defines sentence reduction authority around “extraordinary and compelling reasons,” and the Commission’s policy statements under Section 1B1.13 do not preclude federal courts from resentencing defendants. Once a prisoner has properly pursued their remedies and filed a motion for compassionate release, a federal court possesses authority to reduce a sentence. A court must then consider the § 3553(a) sentencing factors in reducing any sentence. [115] And any reduction of a sentence that a court orders must also be “consistent with applicable policy statements issued by the Sentencing Commission.” [116] As noted above, the Sentencing Commission created a catch-all provision for compassionate release under United States Sentencing Guidelines Section 1B1.13, Application Note 1(D), which states: Other Reasons.—As determined by the Director of the Bureau of Prisons, there exists in the defendant’s case an extraordinary and compelling reason other than, or in combination with, the reasons described in subdivisions (A) through (C). [117] The Commission also stated the process by which compassionate release reductions should be decided: Motion by the Director of the Bureau of Prisons.—A reduction under this policy statement may be granted only upon motion by the Director of the Bureau of Prisons pursuant to 18 U.S.C. § 3582(c)(1)(A). [118] The dependence on the BOP in these policy statements is a relic of the prior procedure that is now inconsistent with the First Step Act’s amendment of § 3582(c)(1)(A). Application Note 1(D) can no longer limit judicial authority to cases with an initial determination by the BOP Director that a prisoner’s case presents extraordinary or compelling reasons for a reduction, because the First Step Act has expressly changed the statutory text to allow courts to consider and grant sentence reductions even in the face of an adverse or unresolved BOP determination concerning whether a prisoner’s case is extraordinary or compelling. [119] And the Commission’s now-outdated statement indicating that the BOP must file a motion in order for a court to consider a compassionate release sentence reduction no longer controls in the face of the changes enacted explicitly to allow a court to consider a reduction even in the absence of a BOP triggering motion. [120] With the First Step Act, Congress has decided federal judges are no longer to be constrained or controlled by how the BOP Director sets the criteria for what constitute extraordinary and compelling reasons for a sentence reduction. Consequently, those sections of the guideline application notes requiring a BOP determination or motion are not binding on courts. [121] Put differently, now that the First Step Act has recast the procedural requirements for a sentence reduction, even if a court finds there exists an extraordinary and compelling reason for a sentence reduction without the BOP Director’s initial determination, then the sentence reduction is not inconsistent “with applicable policy statements issued by the Sentencing Commission.” [122] Circumstances Presenting “Extraordinary and Compelling Reasons” for a Sentence Reduction What constitutes an extraordinary and compelling reason for a sentence reduction? [123] Although neither the statute nor the guideline commentary requires it, as a practical matter, a person in federal prison will likely need to convince a judge that they are no longer a danger to society if released early. If the person filing a request for resentencing has multiple or recent incident reports for violent acts inside a federal prison, or actions that would constitute the commission of a new offense, a judge might hesitate to reduce a sentence no matter how many other extraordinary and compelling circumstances arise. But as the statute explicitly prohibits, rehabilitation alone is not a ground for relief. [124] Thus, while evidence of rehabilitation might be necessary, it is not sufficient for a determination of extraordinary and compelling reasons. One example of an extraordinary and compelling reason for a sentence reduction is when a person in prison was sentenced under a provision that Congress has since found too punitive and amended, although not made retroactively applicable. In the First Step Act, Congress expressly considered retroactive application of all the sentencing reform provisions contained in the Act. But Congress ultimately made only the changes from the Fair Sentencing Act of 2010 available to cases already final. [125] One could look at that move in two ways. On the one hand, Congress’s decision to change, for example, the stacking provisions of 18 U.S.C. § 924(c) meant that Congress viewed those punishments as too punitive and unfair. On the other hand, Congress’s failure to make its changes to § 924(c) retroactively available could be viewed as intending for those already sentenced under the stacking provisions to never receive a reduction in sentence. [126] Yet Congress appeared to have taken a middle ground. Had Congress made the changes retroactively applicable to all, every defendant sentenced to stacked § 924(c) offenses would have been categorically eligible for sentencing relief. By contrast, those sentenced under the § 924(c) stacking provisions and seeking relief under the compassionate release provision (as amended by the First Step Act) must establish extraordinary and compelling reasons individually in order to be eligible for relief. That Congress chose to foreclose one avenue for relief does not mean it chose to foreclose all means of redressing draconian sentences imposed under § 924(c). And, as a textual matter, nothing about Congress’s decision to pass prospective-only changes to § 924(c) prevents a judge from resentencing under the Compassionate Release Statute on the basis of extraordinary and compelling reasons. Other examples of people presenting extraordinary and compelling reasons could be those receiving a long sentence for offenses that society no longer considers dangerous. Those serving long or life without parole sentences for marijuana trafficking offenses are the first to come to mind. [127] Another group of people presenting extraordinary and compelling reasons might be those sentenced to harsh mandatory minimum sentences, even though the facts of their crimes made them far less culpable than someone committing a run-of-the-mill offense. An example would be if a previously convicted felon was sentenced to a fifteen-year mandatory minimum penalty under the Armed Career Criminal Act, when their crime involved the mere possession of a few rounds of ammunition and no evidence that they intended to use that ammunition in the commission of any crime. [128] These are just some examples of what could constitute extraordinary and compelling reasons for a judge to reduce a sentence under the compassionate release provision. With the changes made by the First Step Act, federal courts now have the power and authority to reduce a sentence—even in the absence of a BOP motion—if the court finds “[o]ther reasons,” in that “there exists in the defendant’s case an extraordinary and compelling reason other than, or in combination with, the reasons described in subdivisions (A) through (C).” [129] III. Congress Should Create a True Second Look Provision, Requiring a Federal Judge to Reevaluate a Sentence After a Prisoner Has Served Ten Years Even if federal judges began releasing people with extraordinary and compelling reasons under the compassionate release provision, Congress should still enact a true second look provision. The criteria for a true second look provision would not require extraordinary and compelling reasons, and it could condition the second look on a particular period of time, such as ten years, with additional reviews at five-year intervals. A true second look would also provide categorical eligibility, meaning everyone would receive an opportunity to be resentenced. I won’t wade into the thicket of what would constitute the ideal second look sentencing provision, as scholars and practitioners have provided normative proposals on what second look provisions should include. [130] I will only add that Congress should resist the urge to exclude, as it did from the earned-time provisions of the First Step Act, [131] violent and sex offenses from the second-look provision. Most people convicted of violent or sex offenses, which represents a sizable number of people in federal prison, [132] will one day be released. [133] It is thus incumbent on Congress to incentivize their participation in behavioral therapy and educational programs designed to reduce recidivism. And the best incentive to encourage participation in recidivism-reducing programs is the incentive of early release. [134] Congress should also set the review period at less than the fifteen years proposed by the Model Penal Code. [135] A longer fifteen-year review period might be required due to political pressures in state criminal justice systems, which are largely full of those who have committed violent offenses, including those involving loss of life and serious bodily injury. [136] But the four largest drivers of the federal prison system are nonviolent offenses involving drugs, immigration, fraud, and firearms. [137] For nonviolent offenses, a sentence of ten years is sufficiently punitive. In fact, a ten-year review for a system mostly containing people who committed nonviolent offenses may still be too long, if the goal of the second look provision is utilitarian, such as reducing recidivism and allowing people a second chance at a successful and law-abiding life. [138] Ten years in an American prison is an extraordinary amount of punishment, especially given that the punishment doesn’t end the day of release, due to the thousands of collateral consequences that accompany a felony conviction. [139] U.S. Attorneys Can Dismiss Charges under Holloway Relief For Deserving Prisoners Who Were Over-Sentenced Every actor in the justice system should be empowered to protect liberty, and that is especially true for federal prosecutors, who have a unique role in the justice system. Although federal prosecutors represent the victims of federal crimes along with the federal government, using second look provisions to move those who have been rehabilitated and no longer represent a danger to the public is not inconsistent with that role. [140] And some injustices, such as imposing a trial penalty for those defendants who exercise their constitutional right to a jury trial, are uniquely within the prosecutor’s domain and discretion. Given that prosecutors’ responsibility is to do justice, [141] “prosecutors should be given the power and a formal responsibility to engage in some type of formalized second-look sentencing decision-making.” [142] Under the Holloway doctrine, U.S. Attorneys can be second-look sentencers by dismissing charges, even after a conviction and sentence have long become final. In Holloway , Judge John Gleeson requested that then-U.S. Attorney Loretta Lynch exercise her discretion to vacate two of Mr. Holloway’s 18 U.S.C. § 924(c) convictions that, along with his crimes for carjacking, resulted in a sentence of fifty-seven years and seven months. Representing Ms. Lynch at a hearing, Assistant United States Attorney Sam Nitze noted that the case was indeed unique because Mr. Holloway had exhibited “extraordinary” rehabilitation, because he had already served twenty years of imprisonment, and because “people deserve another chance.” [143] Judge Gleeson resentenced Mr. Holloway to time served. [144] After then-U.S. Attorney Loretta Lynch dismissed charges, allowing Mr. Holloway to be resentenced, Judge Gleeson commented that: This is a significant case, and not just for Francois Holloway. It demonstrates the difference between a Department of Prosecutions and a Department of Justice . It shows how the Department of Justice, as the government’s representative in every federal criminal case, has the power to walk into courtrooms and ask judges to remedy injustices. The use of this power poses no threat to the rule of finality, which serves important purposes in our system of justice. There are no floodgates to worry about; the authority exercised in this case will be used only as often as the Department of Justice itself chooses to exercise it, which will no doubt be sparingly. But the misuse of prosecutorial power over the past 25 years has resulted in a significant number of federal inmates who are serving grotesquely severe sentences, including many serving multiple decades and even life without parole for narcotics offenses that involved no physical injury to others. Even seasoned federal prosecutors will agree that many of those sentences were (and remain) unjustly severe. [145] There are several arguments against federal prosecutors providing Holloway relief. The first is that, if prosecutors dismiss charges after a final sentence, they will undermine the rule of law. Yet every day federal prosecutors exercise their discretion to bring or not bring, to go forward with or dismiss, charges against individual defendants. Doing so after a conviction and sentence is final is no different. Federal prosecutors already perform a similar task in the context of Federal Rule of Criminal Procedure 35, where prosecutors may move for a reduction of sentence at any time if a defendant provides substantial assistance to the government. [146] The discretion to reduce a sentence on the basis of substantial assistance after someone is sentenced does not violate the finality of convictions or the rule of law. So too for a second look. Nor is there any separation of powers problem when prosecutors provide Holloway relief. As Professor Zachary Price has explained, “[p]residents may properly decline to enforce civil and criminal prohibitions in particular cases, notwithstanding their obligation under the Take Care Clause to ensure that ‘the Laws be faithfully executed,’” if the nonenforcement authority does not extend to “policy-based nonenforcement of federal laws for entire categories of offenders.” [147] If the decision to provide Holloway relief is made on an individualized basis, the U.S. Attorneys’ duty, under the Constitution’s Take Care Clause, to faithfully execute the laws is fulfilled. [148] Federal prosecutors have a duty to ensure that prosecutions and punishments are consistent with the Sixth Amendment right to a jury trial. The penalty some defendants face is so great that they are forced to waive their right to a trial by jury as part of a plea agreement to avoid an even stiffer punishment. When Adam Clausen received a 213-year sentence as a trial penalty for multiple and stacked 18 U.S.C. § 924(c) charges, [149] the prosecutors had a duty to right that unjust sentence. [150] Doing so is not inconsistent with the rule of law, but in accordance with it. Another argument against federal prosecutors issuing Holloway relief is that it could lead to sentencing disparities between people who committed similar offenses. But sentencing disparities exist long before a prosecutor decides to give someone a second look after their sentence is final. Law enforcement can create disparities before someone is even charged by manipulating the quantity or type of drug that a defendant buys or sells through controlled sales. [151] The moment someone is charged in federal versus state court, a disparity is created because the defendant is likely to spend more time in prison for a federal charge than similarly situated individuals in state court. [152] And the competence of defense counsel and the probation office, and the varying prosecutorial practices during the federal sentencing proceedings, including the amount of departure a particular Assistant U.S. Attorney provides for cooperation, also create sentencing disparities. Given the large number of sentencing disparities already in the system, sentencing disparity is not a persuasive argument for leaving someone who has been rehabilitated in federal prison. The President Should Commute the Sentences of Those Who Were Unable to Seek Relief Through the Judicial System, But Who Have a Demonstrated Record of Rehabilitation and Who Have Been Sentenced Too Harshly Clemency should function as a meaningful backstop for any second look judicial review of sentences. Even if courts and federal prosecutors possessed the ability to provide second looks of sentences, a properly functioning and robust clemency system would still be needed. Because an unsympathetic judge or prosecutor can thwart relief even for those who have been sentenced too harshly and demonstrated their rehabilitation, overlapping and independent avenues for relief must be available. The current clemency process is anything but functioning or robust. Currently, a clemency petition can be blocked anywhere along a lengthy line of decision points. Located in the DOJ, the Office of Pardon Attorney (OPA) begins the process by gathering information and making a recommendation on each individual clemency petition. Staff at OPA conduct the first review and are required to seek the opinion of the local line prosecutor who pursued the case. Petitions often receive negative recommendations at that point if the line prosecutor who brought the case recommends a denial. The line prosecutor can recommend a denial, even though they might not have seen the clemency petitioner for decades while the petitioner was incarcerated in federal prison. The second step is the recommendation by the Pardon Attorney. Based on information gathered by OPA staff, the Pardon Attorney makes a recommendation. If the Pardon Attorney makes an unfavorable recommendation, the clemency petition will likely go no further. The third stop is the desk of a staffer for the Deputy Attorney General (DAG), who does yet another review. The fourth stop is the DAG, who essentially supervises all criminal prosecutions at the DOJ and is a liaison between main DOJ and line prosecutors. The DAG is probably the least likely person to second guess a local line prosecutor who recommends a denial because of the close working relationship between the DAG and line prosecutors in the federal districts. Under the current process, if the DAG and Pardon Attorney disagree on a clemency petition, only the DAG’s views are sent to the White House. And by the time a recommended denial gets to staff of the White House Counsel, any hope for clemency is ended. The White House Counsel’s office has many other responsibilities, and it does not have the resources to identify deserving candidates in the face of DOJ opposition. White House Counsel conducts the final review and passes only favorable recommendations on to the President. [153] I’m not the first to illustrate the numerous problems with this process. Professors Rachel Barkow and Mark Osler have written extensively on the problems with the current process. [154] To begin with, the process allows the DOJ to thwart the President’s clemency prerogatives. This is exactly what occurred under the Obama Administration. President Obama set criteria for his clemency power, and his Pardon Attorney made numerous favorable recommendations. But his DAG overruled the Pardon Attorney’s favorable recommendations in many individual cases, [155] and “secretly kept from the White House the contrary opinions of the DOJ Pardon Office in the many cases in which [the DAG] overruled or refused to act on the Pardon Office’s recommendation for clemency.” [156] President Obama was not the only resident to have his clemency power thwarted: President George W. Bush “explicitly complained that he was not being provided with [clemency] grant recommendations when he sought them and urged President Obama to focus on fixing the clemency process.” [157] The current process also poses an inherent conflict of interest because, as scholar Paul J. Larkin, Jr. has noted, “[t]he current system leaves too much authority over clemency petitions to the Justice Department, the very agency that prosecuted every federal clemency applicant.” [158] On occasion, the President and the DOJ have different policy perspectives as to criminal justice issues, and, under the Constitution, the President’s views should prevail. Even when the President’s policy prerogatives are upheld by the DOJ’s review of clemency petitions, the process is needlessly bureaucratic, requiring many rounds of sequential review. [159] Multiple layers of sequential review are redundant and inefficient, especially given that five of the deciders do not even specialize in clemency and have countless other tasks. For a single clemency petition to be granted, essentially seven different decisionmakers must agree that a petition is deserving. No wonder so few clemency petitions are granted. As Professors Barkow and Osler have suggested, bringing the clemency process within the White House’s domain is the only way to ensure that the President’s prerogatives take precedence over those of the DOJ. [160] Per their recommendations, the White House should create an independent and bipartisan review commission that reports directly to the President and that includes input from the DOJ. [161] Presidents should make the use of clemency a routine part of the federal criminal justice system. Alice Marie Johnson was not the only person in federal prison who was rehabilitated yet stuck serving a draconian sentence. Clemency can help identify the Alice Marie Johnsons and then release them. Conclusion It is difficult, if not impossible, to determine who, after having been convicted of a serious crime, has the capacity to become rehabilitated and redeemed. Character is not static, people change, and the law must recognize this reality. There is little reason to continue warehousing people who have been adequately punished by serving long sentences, and who are no longer a danger to society. The social costs to the families left behind, the loss of human capital and productivity, and the need to give people a second chance at redemption all favor identifying people like Matthew Charles and releasing them. There is good news. Under the First Step Act and prosecutorial discretion, federal courts and prosecutors have second look tools at their disposal to identify the deserving and reduce their sentence or outright release them. Congress should provide similar remedies on a broader scale, and when those remedies don’t always work as expected, the President can remedy any injustices by revamping the clemency process and then granting clemency petitions for the deserving. We all benefit when people are given a second look at an opportunity for a second chance. † Associate Professor of Law, Georgetown University Law Center. Thank you to the editors of the Cardozo Law Review for inviting me to participate in this unique Collection of Essays about federal sentencing. I’d also like to thank Rachel Elise Barkow, Douglas Berman, Steven H. Goldblatt, Ann Marie Hopwood, Paul J. Larkin, Jr., Mary Price, and Kyle Singhal for their wonderful comments. I want to acknowledge my research assistant, Margaret Rusconi, for her tireless research and sage comments on this Essay and most everything else I have written for the past year. Finally, I want to recognize my friend and former client, Matthew Charles, for inspiring this Essay with his humble and genuine need to give back to those he left behind in federal prison. [1] See Jon Schuppe et al., ‘I Refused to Be Bitter or Angry’: Matthew Charles, Released from Prison and Sent Back Again, Begins Life as a Free Man , NBC (Jan. 8, 2019, 4:06 PM), https://www.nbcnews.com/‌news/‌us-news/‌i-‌refuse-‌be-bitter-or-‌angry-matthew-charles-released-prison-n955796 [https://perma.cc/‌8UXK-FGLH]. [2] See Matthew Charles: Saved by the First Step Act , FAMM, https://famm.org/‌stories/‌matthew-charles-saved-by-the-first-step-act [https://perma.cc/‌7MTH-J6JQ] [hereinafter FAMM]. [3] United States v. Charles, 843 F.3d 1142, 1145 (6th Cir. 2016) (citation omitted). [4] Transcript of Sentencing Hearing at 50, United States v. Charles, No. 3:96-cr-00051 (M.D. Tenn. Dec. 13, 1996), ECF No. 96. [5] By contrast, I’m often held up as a model of rehabilitation, and I received two incident reports while serving nearly eleven years in federal prison. See generally Shon Hopwood, Law Man: Memoir of a Jailhouse Lawyer (2017) (describing my time in federal prison after having been convicted of five bank robberies and the use of a firearm during one of those robberies). I once saw a friend given an incident report because he glared at a correctional officer when that officer was having a bad day. Needless to say, it is quite exceptional to serve more than twenty-one years in the Federal Bureau of Prisons without a single incident report. [6] See FAMM, supra note 2. [7] See id. [8] Julieta Martinelli, A Nashville Man Spent Two Decades Behind Bars. Now The Government Wants Him To Go Back , Nashville Pub. Radio (Dec. 29, 2017), https://www.nashvillepublicradio.org/‌post/‌nashville-‌man-‌spent-‌two-‌decades-‌behind-‌bars-‌now-‌government-‌wants-‌him-‌go-‌back#‌stream/‌0 [https://‌perma.cc/‌EGK6-‌VPKQ]. [9] See FAMM, supra note 2. [10] See Martinelli, supra note 8. [11] The first few years after release are the most difficult, as the formerly incarcerated try to obtain some stability in employment, housing, and community relationships, while adapting to societal changes that occurred during their imprisonment. Those first few years after release are also when people are most likely to recidivate. See U.S. Sentencing Comm’n, Recidivism Among Federal Offenders: A Comprehensive Overview 5 (2016) (“Of those offenders who recidivated, most did so within the first two years of the eight-year follow-up period.”). [12] See Matthew Charles, I Was Released Under the First Step Act. Here’s What Congress Should Do Next ., Wash. Post (Feb. 1, 2019), https://www.washingtonpost.com/‌opinions/‌i-was-released-under-the-first-step-act-heres-what-congress-should-do-next/‌2019/‌02/01/‌1871f1f0-24bb-11e9-ad53-824486280311_story.html?noredirect=on&utm_term=.28ded77e5359 [https://perma.cc/‌CY8E-D2LD]. [13] See United States v. Charles, 843 F.3d 1142, 1143 (6th Cir. 2016). [14] See Debra Cassens Weiss, Federal Judge Steps Down and Denounces Mandatory Minimum Sentences , A.B.A. J. (Apr. 17, 2017, 5:10 PM), http://‌www.‌abajournal.com/‌news/‌article/‌federal_‌judge_‌steps_‌down_‌and_‌denounces_mandatory_‌minimum_‌sentences [https://‌‌perma.cc/‌‌Z9JN-‌AYS4]. [15] Named after the case of United States v. Holloway , 68 F. Supp. 3d 310 (E.D.N.Y. 2014), a case in which U.S. Attorney Loretta Lynch dismissed charges against Mr. Holloway, leading to his resentencing. Holloway relief is discussed infra Part IV. [16] Government’s Supplemental Response Regarding United States v. Holloway, United States v. Charles, No. 3:96-cr-00051 (M.D. Tenn. Jan. 31, 2018), ECF No. 227-1. See Professor Shon Hopwood and Matthew Charles: On Sentences and Second Chances , Geo. U. L. Ctr. (Feb. 8, 2019), https://www.law.georgetown.edu/‌news/‌professor-shon-hopwood-and-matthew-charles-on-sentences-and-second-chances [https://perma.cc/‌5V8T-YTPC]. [17] It was at this point that I began representing him in seeking a grant of clemency from President Trump. [18] See First Step Act of 2018, Pub. L. No. 115-391, 132 Stat. 5194. [19] See id. § 404. [20] Se e Response to Motion to Reduce Sentence, United States v. Charles, No. 3:96-cr-00051, No. 3-96-00051 (M.D. Tenn. Jan. 2, 2019), ECF No. 252. [21] See Order, United States v. Charles, No. 3:96-cr-00051 (M.D. Tenn. Jan. 27, 2019), ECF No. 252. [22] See Jeff Pegues, Man Freed from Prison After Trump Signed Criminal Justice Bill to Attend State of the Union , CBS News (Feb. 5, 2019, 6:57 PM), https://www.cbsnews.com/‌news/‌matthew-charles-freed-from-prison-after-trump-signed-criminal-justice-bill-to-attend-state-of-the-union-2019-02-05 [https://perma.cc/‌5RAF-KAJ2]. [23] Mariah Timms, President Trump: ‘Welcome Home’ to Matthew Charles, Man Released from Nashville Prison Under First Step Act , Tennessean (Feb. 5, 2019, 8:37 PM), https://www.tennessean.com/story/news/2019/02/05/donald-trump-state-of-the-union-matthew-charles-alice-johnson-first-step-act-free/2783545002 [https://perma.cc/BX9H-8LM8]. [24] Id. [25] See FAMM, https://famm.org [https://perma.cc/‌VCB2-XS9A]. [26] See, e.g . , David Marcus, Why President Trump Should Commute the Sentence of Matthew Charles , Federalist (May 28, 2018), https://thefederalist.com/‌2018/‌05/‌28/‌president-‌trump-‌should-‌commute-‌the-‌sentence-‌of-‌matthew-‌charles [https://‌perma.cc/‌B9NN-‌V3ZZ]; Katherine Timpf, Mr. President, Pardon Matthew Charles , Nat’l Rev. (June 1, 2018, 6:30 AM), https://‌www.‌nationalreview.com/‌2018/‌06/‌matthew-‌charles-‌deserves-‌pardon-‌turned-‌his-‌life-‌around [https://‌perma.cc/‌93C4-‌JPW4]; Matt Walsh, This Man Is Being Sent Back to Prison on a Technicality. President Trump Should Step In. , Daily Wire (May 29, 2018), https://www.dailywire.com/‌news/‌31174/‌walsh-‌matthew-‌charles-‌matt-‌walsh [https://‌perma.cc/‌LX62-‌9U32]; Tom Rogan, President Trump, Save Matthew Charles from Being Sent Back to Prison , Wash. Examiner (May 29, 2018, 9:35 AM), https://‌www.‌washingtonexaminer.com/‌opinion/‌president-‌trump-‌save-‌matthew-‌charles-‌from-‌being-‌sent-‌back-‌to-‌prison [https://‌perma.cc/‌TS6B-‌VH4C] ; see also Shon Hopwood, Why Matthew Charles Should Be Granted Clemency , Prison Professors (June 7, 2018), https://‌prisonprofessors.com/‌why-matthew-charles-should-be-granted-clemency [https://‌perma.cc/‌8KHM-‌4C9D]. [27] At my own sentencing, I told U.S. District Court Judge Richard G. Kopf that I would change my ways, and he wouldn’t see me again. Judge Kopf noted years later that when I made those remarks at sentencing, he “would have bet the farm and all the animals that Hopwood would fail miserably as a productive citizen when he finally got out of prison.” RGK, Shon Hopwood and Kopf’s Terrible Sentencing Instincts , Hercules & Umpire (Aug. 8, 2013), https://herculesandtheumpire.com/‌2013/‌08/‌08/‌shon-‌hopwood-‌and-‌kopfs-‌terrible-‌sentencing-‌instincts [https://‌perma.cc/‌P45Y-‌GL8Q]. What Judge Kopf later said was that my life after prison proved that his sentencing instincts (and these are his words, not mine) “suck.” Id. We are now friends. [28] See Alex R. Piquero, Taking Stock of Developmental Trajectories of Criminal Activity over the Life Course , in The Long View of Crime: Synthesis of Longitudinal Research 23 (Akiva M. Liberman ed., 2008); see also German Lopez, The Case for Capping All Prison Sentences at 20 Years , Vox (Feb. 12, 2019, 7:30 AM), https://www.vox.com/‌future-perfect/‌2019/‌2/‌12/‌18184070/‌maximum-prison-sentence-cap-mass-incarceration [https://‌perma.cc/‌CK23-‌H4E5] (quoting Law Professor John Pfaff on the reasons why people age out of crime: “Some of it is physical and hormonal: Testosterone levels go up, testosterone levels go down; violence goes up, violence goes down. Some of it is purely physical: Even if I was as aggressive now as I was 20 years ago, I’m 44—things are slow, things ache a bit more,” he explained. “But some of it is also social: Getting married is a pathway out of crime; finding a career is a pathway out of crime. So the longer we keep people in prison, the longer we tend to undermine the ways these people mature and age out of crime as they get older”); U.S. Sentencing Comm’n, The Effects of Aging on Recidivism Among Federal Offenders 3 (2017) (“Older offenders were substantially less likely than younger offenders to recidivate following release. . . . The pattern was consistent across age groupings, and recidivism measured by rearrest, reconviction, and reincarceration declined as age increased.”). [29] See Peter Baker, Alice Marie Johnson Is Granted Clemency by Trump After Push by Kim Kardashian West , N.Y. Times (June 6, 2018), https://www.nytimes.com/‌2018/‌06/‌06/‌us/‌politics/‌trump-‌alice-‌johnson-‌sentence-‌commuted-‌kim-‌kardashian-‌west.html [https://‌perma.cc/‌BAU8-‌CZPQ]. [30] See William F. Duker, The President’s Power to Pardon: A Constitutional History , 18 Wm. & Mary L. Rev. 475, 497 (1977). [31] Id. [32] Alexander Hamilton, The Federalist No. 74, at 501 (Jacob E. Cooke ed., 1961). [33] See Paul F. Eckstein & Mikaela Colby, Presidential Pardon Power: Are There Limits and, If Not, Should There Be? , 51 Ariz. St. L.J. 71, 80 (2019). [34] See Hamilton, supra note 32. [35] See id. (“[W]ithout an easy access to exceptions in favor of unfortunate guilt, justice would wear a countenance too sanguinary and cruel.”). [36] United States v. Wilson, 32 U.S. 150, 160 (1833). [37] Federal Parole Act of 1910, ch. 387, 36 Stat. 819. [38] See Peter B. Hoffman, History of the Federal Parole System: Part 1 (1910–1972) , 61 Fed. Prob. 23, 23 (1997). [39] Paul J. Larkin, Jr., Parole: Corpse or Phoenix? , 50 Am. Crim. L. Rev. 303, 305 (2013); Morrissey v. Brewer, 408 U.S. 471, 477 (1972) (“Rather than being an ad hoc exercise of clemency, parole is an established variation on imprisonment of convicted criminals” and had become “an integral part of the penological system.”). [40] See Fed. R. Crim. P. 35(b). [41] See 18 U.S.C. § 4205(g) (repealed 1987). [42] See Pub. L. No. 98-473, § 212(a)(2), 98 Stat 1837, 1987 (1984). [43] See William J. Stuntz, The Pathological Politics of Criminal Law , 100 Mich. L. Rev. 505, 514 (2001). [44] See John Malcolm, Criminal Law and the Administrative State: The Problem with Criminal Regulations , Heritage Found. (Aug. 6, 2014), https://www.heritage.org/‌crime-‌and-‌justice/‌report/‌criminal-‌law-‌and-‌the-‌administrative-‌state-‌the-‌problem-‌criminal-‌regulations [https://perma.cc/‌59QV-‌785P]. [45] See Statistics: Past Inmate Population Totals, Fed. Bureau Prisons, https://‌www.bop.gov/‌about/‌statistics/‌population_‌statistics.jsp#‌old_‌pops [https://perma.cc/‌7KR6-‌DBLF] (last updated Aug. 29, 2019). [46] Id. [47] For other reasons why judicial second look provisions are advantageous, see Cecelia Klingele, Changing the Sentence Without Hiding the Truth: Judicial Sentence Modification as a Promising Method of Early Release , 52 Wm. & Mary L. Rev. 465, 515–20 (2010). [48] See Donald P. Green & Daniel Winik, Using Random Judge Assignments to Estimate the Effects of Incarceration and Probation on Recidivism Among Drug Offenders , 48 Criminology 357, 357–58 (2010). Recently, the U.S. Sentencing Commission released a study explaining that those released early under the Fair Sentencing Act had the same recidivism rate as those who did not receive a reduction. See U.S. Sentencing Comm’n, Recidivism Among Federal Offenders Receiving Retroactive Sentence Reductions: The 2011 Fair Sentencing Act Guideline Amendment 1 (2018) (“The Commission finds no difference between the recidivism rates for offenders who were released early due to retroactive application of the FSA Guideline Amendment and offenders who had served their full sentences before the FSA Guideline Amendment reduction retroactively took effect.”). [49] See, e.g. , James Q. Wilson, Thinking About Crime 118–19 (rev. ed., 1983); James Q. Wilson & Richard J. Herrnstein, Crime and Human Nature 49–56, 416–21 (1985); John J. DiIulio, Jr., Help Wanted: Economists, Crime and Public Policy , 10 J. Econ. Persp. 3, 16–17 (1996). [50] See, e.g. , Paul Butler, Let’s Get Free: A Hip-Hop Theory of Justice 23–40 (2009) (explaining why imprisonment can make society less safe because of desensitization and disruption of communities); Dina R. Rose & Todd R. Clear, Incarceration, Social Capital, and Crime: Implications for Social Disorganization Theory , 36 Criminology 441, 442–78 (1998) (explaining criminogenic effect of prison); Daniel S. Nagin et al., Imprisonment and Reoffending , 38 Crime & Just. 115, 125–27 (2009) (“Although intended to prevent crime, this unique experience in social segregation is argued to have the unintended consequence of increasing exposure to crime-inducing influences and of decreasing exposure to prosocial influences.”). [51] Press Release, The White House, CEA Report: Economic Perspective on Incarceration and the Criminal Justice System 39 (Apr. 23, 2016) (“[A] growing body of work has found that incarceration increases recidivism.”); Cassia Spohn & David Holleran, The Effect of Imprisonment on Recidivism Rates of Felony Offenders: A Focus on Drug Offenders , 40 Criminology 329, 329–58 (2002) (finding that individuals sentenced to prison had higher recidivism rates and recidivated more quickly than individuals sentenced to probation); Lynne M. Vieraitis et al., The Criminogenic Effects of Imprisonment: Evidence from State Panel Data, 1974–2002 , 3 Criminology & Pub. Pol’y 589, 589, 622 (2007) (finding that increased prison releases are associated with higher crime rates and arguing that this is due to the criminogenic effects of prison); Tracey L. Meares et al., Updating the Study of Punishment , 56 Stan. L. Rev. 1171, 1183 (2004) (“By segregating such actors from mainstream America, the criminal law may reinforce a tendency towards criminal action. In economic terms, when an individual cannot get hired for lawful work because she was once an outlaw, the relative cost of illegal activity decreases. Moreover, from a psychological perspective, those branded outlaws may begin to internalize such labels and fulfill the expectation that they believe the criminal system and society have for them. Instead of reducing crime, stigmatization strategies may increase the criminal activity of particular actors.”). [52] One of the first things I realized during my own reentry was that employers no longer advertised jobs in the classified sections of newspapers. I found my first couple of jobs on a workforce computer that I had little idea of how to operate because I had not previously used the Internet and the BOP provided no computer training. [53] M. Marit Rehavi & Sonja B. Starr, Racial Disparity in Federal Criminal Sentences , 122 J. Pol. Econ. 1320, 1323 (2014). [54] See U.S. Sentencing Comm’n, Demographic Differences in Sentencing: An Update to the 2012 Booker Report 2 (2017). The Commission came to this conclusion after accounting for multiple variables, including criminal history, age, education, citizenship, and whether someone pleaded guilty. Id. [55] Rachel Elise Barkow, Prisoners of Politics: Breaking the Cycle of Mass Incarceration 47 (2019). [56] See Eric Martin, Hidden Consequences: The Impact of Incarceration on Dependent Children , 278 Nat’l Inst. Just. J. 1 (2017); Creasie Finney Hairston, Focus on Children with Incarcerated Parents: An Overview of the Research Literature (2007). [57] See Megan Cox, The Relationships Between Episodes of Parental Incarceration and Students’ Psycho-Social and Educational Outcomes: An Analysis of Risk Factors 3 (May 2009) (unpublished Ph.D. dissertation, Temple University) (on file with author); see also Charles Colson Task Force on Fed. Convictions, Transforming Prisons, Restoring Lives: Final Recommendations of the Charles Colson Task Force on Federal Convictions 15 (2016). [58] Statistics: Past Inmate Population Totals , Fed. Bureau Prisons, https://www.bop.gov/‌about/‌statistics/‌population_‌statistics.jsp#‌old_‌pops [https://‌perma.cc/‌7KR6-‌DBLF] (last updated Sept. 5, 2019). [59] The fiscal year 2019 budget request for the BOP calls for $7,086.9 million. See Dep’t Just., Federal Prison System (2019). [60] Sally Q. Yates, Deputy Att’y Gen., U.S. Dep’t of Justice, McNamara Memorial Lecture at Fordham University (Nov. 14, 2016) (“The Justice Department’s prison and detention costs have increased by almost three billion dollars in the past decade alone and now account for roughly one third of the department’s budget. This comes with significant public safety consequences because the growing [Bureau of Prisons] budget is crowding out everything else we do at the department.”). [61] See Cesare Beccaria, On Crimes and Punishments 55 (5th ed. 2009); Francis T. Cullen & Cheryl Lero Jonson, Correctional Theory: Context and Consequences 120–26 (2012); Daniel S. Nagin, Deterrence in the Twenty-First Century , 42 Crime & Just. 199, 201 (2013) (“[T]here is little evidence that increases in the length of already long prison sentences yield general deterrent effects that are sufficiently large to justify their social and economic costs. . . . [T]here is substantial evidence that increasing the visibility of the police by hiring more officers and allocating existing officers in ways that materially heighten the perceived risk of apprehension can deter crimes.”); see also Mark A. R. Kleiman & Kelsey R. Hollander, Reducing Crime by Shrinking the Prison Headcount , 9 Ohio St. J. Crim. L. 89, 89 (2011) (arguing that the five principles of effective punishment are the “Five C’s”: certainty, celerity, concentration, communication, and credibility). [62] 18 U.S.C. § 3553(a) (2012). [63] Id. § 3553(a)(2)(A), (C). Of course, the sentence may still reflect “just punishment for the offense.” See Id. § 3553(a)(2)(A). In my experience, very few decisionmakers (whether judges or prosecutors) understand how much punishment people receive by prison sentences or the punishment that occurs once someone finishes their prison sentence. [64] See Paul J. Larkin, Jr., Clemency, Parole, Good-Time Credits, and Crowded Prisons Reconsidering Early Release , 11 Geo. J.L. & Pub. Pol’y 1, 2 (2013) (“No prisoner has a constitutional right to demand an early release via any of those devices, but the federal and state governments have found them to be useful tools for penological, fiscal, and humanitarian purposes.”). [65] See Shon Hopwood, Beyond First Steps: Reforming the Federal Bureau of Prisons , 31 Fed. Sent’g Rep. 119, 119 (2018) (describing how incentives can improve the federal prison system). [66] 18 U.S.C. § 3553(a)(2)(A)–(B) (noting deterrence is a goal of sentencing). See Meghan J. Ryan, Taking Another Look at Second-Look Sentencing , 81 Brook. L. Rev. 149, 156 (2015) (“The severity, certainty, and swiftness of punishment have been said to be central components of deterrence, so undermining the severity and certainty of punishment—or even maybe the certainty of the extent of punishment—could undermine the deterrence value of punishment.”). [67] See Nagin, supra note 61, at 200 (“General deterrence refers to the crime prevention effects of the threat of punishment.”). [68] For a good discussion of whether the criminal law deters crime, see Paul H. Robinson, Distributive Principles of Criminal Law: Who Should Be Punished How Much? 31–97 (2008). [69] David Roodman, The Impacts of Incarceration on Crime , in Open Philanthropy Proj. (Sept. 2017), https://www.openphilanthropy.org/‌files/‌Focus_‌Areas/‌Criminal_‌Justice_‌Reform/‌The_‌impacts_‌of_‌incarceration_‌on_‌crime_‌10.pdf [https://‌perma.cc/‌8JPN-ZCSY]; see also Human Rights Watch, Old Behind Bars: The Aging Prison Population in the United States 92 (2012) (“Requiring people to remain in prison until the end of their sentence regardless of age and infirmity has no demonstrable general deterrent effect.”); Steven N. Durlauf & Daniel S. Nagin, Imprisonment and Crime: Can Both Be Reduced? , 10 Criminology & Pub. Pol’y 13 (2011). [70] See John S. Baker, Jr., Revisiting the Explosive Growth of Federal Crimes , Heritage Found. (June 16, 2008), https://www.heritage.org/‌report/‌revisiting-‌the-‌explosive-‌growth-‌federal-‌crimes [https://‌perma.cc/‌LF9Y-‌3TRZ]; Paul J. Larkin, Jr., Public Choice Theory and Overcriminalization , 36 Harv. J.L. & Pub. Pol’y 715, 729 (2013). [71] See Jeffrey Fagan & Tracey L. Meares, Punishment, Deterrence and Social Control: The Paradox of Punishment in Minority Communities , 6 Ohio St. J. Crim. L. 173, 181 (2008) (“[T]he effectiveness of deterrence is premised on the actor’s knowledge of the sanctions themselves and an ability to weigh not only the severity of the sanction with which he or she will be met, but also the likelihood of being met with that sanction.”). [72] See More Imprisonment Does Not Reduce State Drug Problems , Pew (Mar. 8, 2018), https://www.pewtrusts.org/‌en/‌research-and-analysis/‌issue-briefs/‌2018/‌03/‌more-imprisonment-does-not-reduce-state-drug-problems [https://perma.cc/‌BW6A-‌CLC2]. [73] See Editorial Board, In Search of Second Chances , N.Y. Times (May 31, 2014), https://www.nytimes.com/‌2014/‌06/‌01/opinion/sunday/in-search-of-second-chances.html [https://perma.cc/7D4M-BVCV]. [74] William W. Berry III, Extraordinary and Compelling: A Re-Examination of the Justifications for Compassionate Release , 68 Md. L. Rev. 850, 852–53 (2009) (“The Bureau of Prisons has read this language very narrowly for many years, considering only terminally ill inmates as candidates for compassionate release.”). [75] 18 U.S.C. § 3582(c)(1)(A)(i) (2012). [76] See 18 U.S.C. § 4205(g) (repealed 1987). [77] United States v. Diaco, 457 F. Supp. 371, 375 (D. N.J. 1978). [78] Id. at 376. [79] United States v. Banks, 428 F. Supp. 1088, 1089 (E.D. Mich. 1977). [80] Id. [81] “We normally assume that, when Congress enacts statutes, it is aware of relevant judicial precedent.” Ryan v. Gonzales, 568 U.S. 57, 66 (2013) (internal quotation marks omitted). [82] Sekhar v. United States, 570 U.S. 729, 733 (2013). [83] 18 U.S.C. § 3582(c)(1)(A)(i) (2012). [84] Id. [85] There is nothing unusual about Congress legislating a broad and open standard and then delegating that particularized application of that standard to an executive agency or the federal judiciary. Congress has, for example, delegated to the judiciary to define what constitutes a “reasonable attorney’s fee” under the various civil rights statutes. 42 U.S.C. § 2000a-3(b) (2012); see also Frank H. Easterbrook, Statutes’ Domains , 50 U. Chi. L. Rev. 533, 544 (1983) (“The statute books are full of laws, of which the Sherman Act is a good example, that effectively authorize courts to create new lines of common law.”). [86] S. Rep No. 98-225, at 52, 53 n.196 (1983). [87] Id. at 55–56 (emphasis added). [88] Id. at 56. [89] Id. at 121. [90] Id. [91] Id. (emphasis added). [92] Id. at 55–56. [93] See 28 U.S.C. § 994(t) (2012) (“The Commission . . . shall describe what should be considered extraordinary and compelling reasons for sentence reduction, including the criteria to be applied and a list of specific examples.”). [94] Id. (emphasis added). [95] The BOP created policies governing compassionate release. The latest version prior to passage of the First Step Act was Program Statement 5050.49, Compassionate Release/Reduction in Sentences (Mar. 25, 2015). U.S. Dep’t Justice, Compassionate Release/Reduction in Sentence: Procedures for Implementation of 18 U.S.C. §§ 3582(c)(1)(A) and 4205(g) (2015). [96] U.S. Sentencing Guidelines Manual § 1B1.13 app. n.1(A) (U.S. Sentencing Comm’n 2018). [97] See U.S. Dep’t Justice, The Federal Bureau of Prisons’ Compassionate Release Program (2013). [98] U.S. Sentencing Guidelines Manual § 1B1.13 app. n.4 (U.S. Sentencing Comm’n 2018); see also United States v. Dimasi, 220 F. Supp. 3d 173, 175 (D. Mass. 2016) (discussing the progression from the Office of the Inspector General report to new “encouraging” guidelines). [99] U.S. Sentencing Guidelines Manual § 1B1.13 app. n.1(A) (U.S. Sentencing Comm’n 2018). [100] Id. at app. n.2. [101] Id. [102] See 18 U.S.C. § 3582(c)(1)(A) (2012). [103] Id. [104] The DOJ recognized that, prior to the passage of the First Step Act, the BOP, and not the Commission, functionally had final say on what constituted an “extraordinary and compelling reason” for a sentence reduction because only the BOP could bring a motion under the terms of § 3582(c)(1)(A). See Letter from Michael J. Elston, Senior Counsel to the Assistant Attorney Gen., U.S. Dep’t of Justice, to Hon. Ricardo H. Hinojosa, Chair, U.S. Sentencing Comm’n 4 (July 14, 2006) (noting that because Congress gave the BOP the power to control which particular cases will be brought to a court’s attention, “it would be senseless [for the Commission] to issue policy statements allowing the court to grant such motions on a broader basis than the responsible agency will seek them” and that expanding compassionate release would be a “dead letter, because the Department will not file motions under 18 U.S.C. § 3582(c)(1)(A)(i) outside of the circumstances allowed by its policies”). [105] “This is because the Bureau of Prisons has chosen to usurp court power, and only grant compassionate release in the most narrow of circumstances.” Jalila Jefferson-Bullock, Are You (Still) My Great and Worthy Opponent?: Compassionate Release of Terminally Ill Offenders , 83 UMKC L. Rev. 521, 523 (2015); see also Berry III, supra note 74, at 853 (“The Bureau of Prisons, in limiting its need to review compassionate release petitions to medical cases, thus abandons the flexibility to consider truly compelling cases, perhaps in part for a lack of method by which to separate the meritorious cases from the many that do not rise to the level of extraordinary and compelling.”). [106] See The Federal Bureau of Prisons’ Compassionate Release Program, supra note 97, at i–iv. [107] Id. at 11; see generally Stephen R. Sady & Lynn Deffebach, Second Look Resentencing Under 18 U.S.C. § 3582(c) as an Example of Bureau of Prisons Policies That Result in Overincarceration , 21 Fed. Sent’g Rep. 167 (2009). [108] See First Step Act of 2018, Pub. L. No. 115-391, sec. 603, 132 Stat. 5194, 5238–41. [109] First Step Act of 2018 sec. 603, § 3582(c)(1)(A). [110] Id. [111] Id. [112] 164 Cong. Rec. H10358 (daily ed. Dec. 20, 2018). [113] 164 Cong. Rec. S7774 (daily ed. Dec. 18, 2018) (emphasis added). [114] 164 Cong. Rec. H10346, H10362 (Dec. 20, 2018) (emphasis added). [115] 18 U.S.C. § 3582(c)(1)(A) (2012). [116] Id. [117] U.S. Sentencing Guidelines Manual § 1B1.13 app. n.1(D) (U.S. Sentencing Comm’n 2018). [118] Id. § 1B1.13 app. n.4. [119] See 18 U.S.C. § 3582(c)(1)(A), as amended by the First Step Act. [120] Id. [121] See Stinson v. United States, 508 U.S. 36, 38 (1993) (“We decide that commentary in the Guidelines Manual that interprets or explains a guideline is authoritative unless it violates the Constitution or a federal statute, or is inconsistent with, or a plainly erroneous reading of, that guideline.”). [122] 18 U.S.C. § 3582(c)(1)(A), as amended by the First Step Act. [123] Few scholars have attempted to answer this question, but see Berry III, supra note 74, at 853–54 (arguing that “the non-penal interests of the state (in light of the ‘extraordinary and compelling’ factual circumstance) must clearly outweigh the state’s penological interest in the inmate serving the entire sentence before compassionate release may be justified”). See also Lindsey E. Wylie, Alexis K. Knutson & Edie Greene, Extraordinary and Compelling: The Use of Compassionate Release Laws in the United States , 24 Psychol. Pub. Pol’y & L. 216 (2018). [124] See 28 U.S.C. § 994(t) (2012). [125] See First Step Act of 2018, Pub. L. No. 115-391, § 404, 132 Stat. 5194, 5222. [126] See id. § 403(b) (“This section, and the amendments made by this section, shall apply to any offense that was committed before the date of enactment of this Act, if a sentence for the offense has not been imposed as of such date of enactment.”). [127] See 21 U.S.C. § 841(b) (2012). [128] See 18 U.S.C. § 922(g) (2012) (making it unlawful for someone with a felony conviction to possess firearms or “ammunition”); Id. § 924(e)(1) (requiring a fifteen-year mandatory minimum for possession of firearms or ammunition by one possessing three requisite prior convictions). [129] U.S. Sentencing Guidelines Manual § 1B1.13 app. n.1(D) (U.S. Sentencing Comm’n 2018). [130] See Margaret Colgate Love & Cecelia Klingele, First Thoughts About “Second Look” and Other Sentence Reduction Provisions of the Model Penal Code: Sentencing Revision , 42 U. Tol. L. Rev. 859 (2011); Richard F. Frase, Second Look Provisions in the Proposed Model Penal Code Revisions , 21 Fed. Sent’g Rep. 194, 195 (2009). [131] See First Step Act of 2018, Pub. L. No. 115-391, sec. 101, § 3632(d)(4)(D), 132 Stat. 5194, 5196–98. [132] See Jacob Sullum, The Number of Men in Federal Prison for Viewing or Sharing Child Pornography Has Nearly Septupled Since 2004 , Reason (Jan. 2, 2019, 2:45 PM), https://reason.com/‌2019/‌01/‌02/‌the-number-of-men-in-federal-prison-for [https://perma.cc/ZM2T-M4E6] (“The number of child pornography offenders in federal prison has nearly septupled since 2004, and most are serving mandatory sentences of five years or more, generally for crimes that did not involve assault or sexual abuse.”). [133] See Nathan James, Cong. research serv., RL34287, Offender Reentry: Correctional Statistics, Reintegration into the Community, and Recidivism 3 (2015) (noting that “95% of all inmates will eventually return to the community”). [134] See Shon Hopwood, Beyond First Steps: How to Reform the Federal Bureau of Prisons , 31 Fed. Sent’g Rep. 119 (2018). [135] See Model Penal Code § 305.6 (advocating for a second look provision for prisoners who have served fifteen years of any sentence of imprisonment, with recurring third and additional looks set at ten years). [136] See Wendy Sawyer & Peter Wagner, Mass Incarceration: The Whole Pie 2019 , Prison Pol’y Initiative (Mar. 19, 2019), https://www.prisonpolicy.org/‌reports/‌pie2019.‌html [https://perma.cc/‌B8QA-‌2WVY]. [137] See U.S. Sent’g Commission, Quick Facts on Federal Offenders in the Bureau of Prisons (2017). [138] See supra Section I.B. [139] See Shon Hopwood, Improving Federal Sentencing , 87 UMKC L. Rev. 79, 80–83, 88–92 (2018). [140] See supra Section I.B. [141] See Fred C. Zacharias, Structuring the Ethics of Prosecutorial Trial Practice: Can Prosecutors Do Justice? , 44 Vand. L. Rev. 45 (1991); Michael Herz, “Do Justice!”: Variations of a Thrice-Told Tale , 82 Va. L. Rev. 111 (1996); see also Robert H. Jackson, The Federal Prosecutor , 31 J. Crim. L. & Criminology 3, 4 (1940) (“Although the government technically loses its case, it has really won if justice has been done.”). [142] Douglas Berman, Encouraging (and Even Requiring) Prosecutors to Be Second-Look Sentencers , 19 Temp. Pol. & C.R. L. Rev. 429, 435 (2010). [143] United States v. Holloway, 68 F. Supp. 3d 310, 315 (E.D.N.Y. 2014). [144] See Joe Palazzolo, Persuasive Judges Win Reduced Sentences for Some Convicts , Wall St. J. (Nov. 23, 2015, 9:37 PM), https://www.wsj.com/articles/persuasive-judges-win-reduced-sentences-for-some-convicts-1448324596 [https://perma.cc/AU2F-V9N3]. [145] Holloway , 68 F. Supp. 3d at 316–17 (emphasis included in original). [146] See Fed. R. Crim. P. 35(b)(1), (2). [147] See Zachary S. Price, Enforcement Discretion and Executive Duty , 67 Vand. L. Rev. 671, 674–75 (2014). [148] See Patricia L. Bellia, Faithful Execution and Enforcement Discretion , 164 U. Pa. L. Rev. 1753, 1788 (2016) (“The early constitutional history also suggests that faithful execution encompasses a power not to pursue particular offenders, based on innocence or considerations of justice and equity in particular cases.”); Price, supra note 147, at 674–75. [149] See Shon Hopwood, Clarity in Criminal Law , 54 Am. Crim. L. Rev. 695 (2017). [150] Nat’l Ass’n Criminal Def. Lawyers, The Trial Penalty: The Sixth Amendment Right to Trial on the Verge of Extinction and How to Save It 6 (2018) (describing the “trial penalty”). [151] See Jon O. Newman, The New Commission’s Opportunity , 8 Fed. Sent’g Rep. 8, 8–9 (1995). [152] See Michael M. O’Hear, National Uniformity/Local Uniformity: Reconsidering the Use of Departures to Reduce Federal-State Sentencing Disparities , 87 Iowa L. Rev. 721, 741–43 (2002) (explaining why federal-state disparities should be considered at sentencing). [153] For scholarship explaining the current clemency process, see Margaret Colgate Love, The Twilight of the Pardon Power , 100 J. Crim. L. & Criminology 1169, 1172–204 (2010). [154] See, e.g. , Rachel E. Barkow, Clemency and Presidential Administration of Criminal Law , 90 N.Y.U. L. Rev. 802, 840 (2015) [hereinafter Barkow, Clemency and Presidential Administration of Criminal Law ]; Rachel E. Barkow & Mark Osler, Designed to Fail: The President’s Deference to the Department of Justice in Advancing Criminal Justice Reform , 59 Wm. & Mary L. Rev. 387, 388 (2017); Rachel E. Barkow & Mark Osler, Restructuring Clemency: The Cost of Ignoring Clemency and a Plan for Renewal , 82 U. Chi. L. Rev. 1 (2015) [hereinafter Barkow & Osler, Restructuring Clemency: The Cost of Ignoring Clemency and a Plan for Renewal ]; Rachel E. Barkow, The Politics of Forgiveness: Reconceptualizing Clemency , 21 Fed. Sent’g Rep. 153, 153 (2009). They are not the only ones to address the problems of federal clemency. See, e.g . , Margaret Colgate Love, Justice Department Administration of the President’s Pardon Power: A Case Study in Institutional Conflict of Interest , 47 U. Tol. L. Rev. 89 (2015); Margaret Colgate Love, Reinvigorating the Federal Pardon Process: What the President Can Learn from the States , 9 U. St. Thomas L.J. 730, 751–54 (2012); Paul J. Larkin, Jr., A Proposal to Restructure the Clemency Process—The Vice President as Head of a White House Clemency Office , 40 Harv. J.L. & Pub. Pol’y 237 (2017); Paul J. Larkin, Jr., Revitalizing the Clemency Process , 39 Harv. J.L. & Pub. Pol’y 833, 846–47 (2016). [155] See Shon Hopwood, The Effort to Reform the Federal Criminal Justice System , 128 Yale L.J. Forum 791, 806–07 (2019). [156] Alec Karakatsanis, The Punishment Bureaucracy: How to Think About “Criminal Justice Reform,” 128 Yale L.J. Forum 848, 915 (2019). [157] Barkow, Clemency and Presidential Administration of Criminal Law , supra note 154, at 828. [158] Paul J. Larkin, Jr., “A Day Late and a Dollar Short”—President Obama’s Clemency Initiative 2014 , 16 Geo. J.L. & Pub. Pol’y 147, 161 (2018). [159] See Barkow & Osler, Restructuring Clemency: The Cost of Ignoring Clemency and a Plan for Renewal , supra note 154, at 5. [160] Id. [161] Id. Volume 41 Issue 1 Search Search for: Search © 2025 Cardozo Law Review & Cardozo Law Review de•novo | All Rights Reserved | Privacy PolicyClaims of pandemic fall in child anxiety may not apply across the whole country – Full Fact Menu Donate Fact checks Fact checks Our fact checking systematically raises standards in public debate and changes the behaviour of powerful actors Latest Politics Health Immigration Economy, Business & Finance Culture & Society Science & Technology Environment Crime Education Conflict Shopping Hoaxes US Europe World Analysis Analysis We’re campaigning to tackle bad information online, protect our elections and improve the quality of information in public debate Analysis Comment Government Tracker Politics Live Policy & Impact Policy & Impact Our policy work aims to improve the information environment, in order to protect and encourage good public debate Policy & Impact Reports Information incidents framework Research The Full Fact Report Letters & submissions The Online Safety Act About About Bad information ruins lives. We’re a team of independent fact checkers and campaigners who find, expose and counter the harm it does Who we are How we fact check After we fact check Our team Contact us Careers Funding Independence Impartiality Feedback & corrections FAQs International networks Full Fact Training Full Fact AI Search Home / Health Claims of pandemic fall in child anxiety may not apply across the whole country 27 August 2020 What was claimed Anxiety levels among young teenagers dropped during the coronavirus pandemic, a study has suggested. Our verdict There is nothing wrong with the study, which surveyed year 9 students in the south west of England. But this data may not be representative of children across the country and in other age groups. This week many media outlets covered a new study which suggests that anxiety levels among young people fell during the pandemic. The study was based on a survey of around 1,000 year 9 students in the south west of England. It found that students reported lower levels of anxiety when surveyed in April and May of this year compared to October 2019. It also found an increase in wellbeing but “no large change in risk of depression.” There’s nothing wrong with this study in terms of its method or what it claims, but it shouldn’t necessarily be taken to represent the experience of all children across the country. It can’t rule out the possibility that the mental toll of the pandemic may have been different across different parts of the country, and for people of different ages. For example, a study out of the University of Oxford, asked parents and carers to report any changes in behavior of their children during a one-month period in lockdown. It found that while parents and carers reported that the emotional difficulties of adolescents decreased, the emotional difficulties of children aged four to ten increased. Also a potential contributor to feelings of anxiety among students during the pandemic has been the uncertainty over exam results, which would have primarily affected students in years 11 and 13, not year 9 (as the study itself notes). The study says that it is “important to note that not all young people saw improvements in their mental health and wellbeing” and that some young people experienced “increased anxiety and depression and decreased wellbeing.” The overall improvement in anxiety was largely due to improvement in young people who had already been at higher risk of anxiety before the lockdown, which the paper speculates may have been because possible sources of stress (such as school pressures or bullying) had been removed. Finally, the experiences of students in the south west might be reasonably different to the experiences across the UK as regards the human cost of the pandemic. Looking at the months of March to June, the Office for National Statistics said that: “The lowest proportion of deaths involving COVID-19 was in the South West with 2,872, making up 13.6% of the 21,094 total deaths.” The highest age-standardised mortality rate was in London, with 142 deaths per 100,000 people involving Covid-19, over three times the rate in the South West. It is reasonable therefore to believe that students in the South West may have been less likely to have been directly affected by a family member, for instance, becoming ill from or dying of Covid-19, compared to students elsewhere in the UK. By Abbas Panjwani Share this: Twitter Facebook Health Coronavirus Mental health Education Childcare Was this helpful? Full Fact fights for good, reliable information in the media, online, and in politics. Support Full Fact today Full Fact fights bad information Bad information ruins lives. It promotes hate, damages people’s health, and hurts democracy. You deserve better. Get the information you need Who we are Funding and independence Our impartiality Feedback and corrections Media enquiries Twitter Facebook Instagram Full Fact is a registered charity (no. 1158683 ) and a non-profit company (no. 06975984 ) limited by guarantee and registered in England and Wales. © Copyright 2010-2025 Full Fact. Thanks to Bytemark for donating our web hosting. Privacy, terms and conditions.Impact of the COVID-19 Pandemic on Pediatric Anxiety and Depression: Prevalence Data, Theoretical Synthesis, and Clinical Implications Loading… Loading… Journal of Clinical and Translational Hepatology Exploratory Research and Hypothesis in Medicine Journal of Exploratory Research in Pharmacology Journal of Clinical and Translational Pathology Cancer Screening and Prevention Future Integrative Medicine Gene Expression Journal of Translational Gastroenterology Oncology Advances Neurosurgical Subspecialties Search Advanced Home Journals Journal of Clinical and Translational Hepatology Exploratory Research and Hypothesis in Medicine Journal of Exploratory Research in Pharmacology Journal of Clinical and Translational Pathology Cancer Screening and Prevention Future Integrative Medicine Gene Expression Journal of Translational Gastroenterology Oncology Advances Neurosurgical Subspecialties Medical Research & Publication Information For Authors For Reviewers For Editorial Board Members Article Processing Charges Open Access Ethics Editorial Policy Advertising Policy Resource Center About Us Company Information Contact Us Membership Collaborators Partners Submit Manuscript Collections Publications > Journals > Exploratory Research and Hypothesis in Medicine > Article Full Text Review Article OPEN ACCESS Impact of the COVID-19 Pandemic on Pediatric Anxiety and Depression: Prevalence Data, Theoretical Synthesis, and Clinical Implications Alexandra Mendelsohn 1 , Alanna Greenberger 1 and Robert D. Friedberg 2,* Author information 1 Center for the Study and Treatment of Anxious Youth, Palo Alto University, CA, USA 2 Altamont Center for Cognitive Behavioral Training and Consultation, CA, USA * Correspondence to: Robert D. Friedberg, Altamont Center for Cognitive and Behavioral Training and Consultation, 363 Vista Roma Way, San Jose, CA 95136, USA. ORCID: https://orcid.org/0000-0001-8821-1723 . Tel: 408-775-4904, E-mail: drbobcbt@gmail.com Exploratory Research and Hypothesis in Medicine 2024 ; 9 ( 4 ) : 328 - 337 doi: 10.14218/ERHM.2024.00004 Cite this article Share Metrics Permissions Abstract Over the course of the COVID-19 pandemic and its aftermath, growing concerns have emerged about the mental health of children and youth. Disease, loss, and lockdowns presented young people with enormous stressors, and much research suggests elevated levels of pediatric depression, anxiety, suicidality, and obsessive-compulsive behavior. However, considerable debate remains about the nature and persistence of these symptoms. This narrative review, conducted approximately four years after the onset of the pandemic, summarizes the major findings from four years of research, including empirical studies, meta-analyses, and systematic reviews. Studies were sourced from scholarly databases using the keywords “COVID-19”, “children”, “adolescents”, and “mental health”. The existing literature on the prevalence of depression in youth indicated that worldwide rates varied from 2.2% to 11.8% of the population, with one study revealing that one in four young people reported depressive symptoms. More specifically, 44% of youth in the United States demonstrated depression, while in China, the prevalence rate ranged from 11% to 44% of young people. Reviewed data showed that 20% of youth globally endorsed symptoms of anxiety or stress reactions, with countries such as Denmark (44%), Canada (45%), and the United States (32%) reporting extremely high rates. In the implications section, recommendations for screening and intervention procedures are outlined. Keywords COVID-19 pandemic, Children’s health, Mood disorders, Obsessive-compulsive disorder, Suicidal ideation, Cognitive behavioral therapy Introduction Between December 2019 and March 2020, a novel coronavirus, severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2, evolved into a worldwide pandemic. COVID-19, as it is now known, along with its associated containment measures, fractured societies across the globe. Rates of disease, social distancing measures, and economic disruption destabilized many people’s daily routines, particularly those of children, youth, and families. By 2021, 86 million individuals had contracted COVID-19, and in the United States, 1 nearly 140,000 youth experienced the death of a parent and/or a grandparent. 2 Children’s vulnerability to infection and serious complications increased with the emergence of the Delta and other variants. 3 Demaria et al. 4 asserted that “An unknown virus, the absence of treatment, and unanswered questions can stimulate automatic thoughts on contagion and disease.” These thoughts often shape distressing feelings and problematic behaviors. The COVID-19 pandemic represented a “critical incident” exacerbating anxiety and depression in children and adolescents. 5 Pinciotti et al. characterized the viral outbreak as a “looming vulnerability,” 6 a psychological construct developed by Riskind, which refers to circumstances that elevate individuals’ emotional distress as a function of rapidly increasing probability of danger. 7 Consequently, mental health struggles increased globally during the peri-pandemic period, 8,9 with the worldwide prevalence of psychiatric disturbances proving far more elevated than expected. 10 During the pandemic, youth across the board faced significant disruption to the social and academic infrastructure of their daily lives. 11 A comprehensive systematic review encompassing 116 articles assessing over 125,000 children and adolescents across Europe, North America, Asia, Australia, and Africa documented significant behavioral health impacts on youth during the peri-pandemic period. 12 In a cross-sectional, web-based survey completed by Canadian adolescents and transitional-aged youth, 86% of respondents noted a decline in their mental health during the viral outbreak. 13 The last four years of research have begun to unearth several patterns in the mental health trajectories of children and youth, with a significant fraction of adolescents experiencing deterioration in their symptomatology, ranging from 30% to 70%. 14 However, there has been considerable debate regarding the extent of this impact and the populations most affected. 15 Depression, anxiety, COVID-specific fears, and suicidal behaviors skyrocketed across the globe during the peri-pandemic period. Moreover, the emotional effects of the viral outbreak are not confined to the active phase of the pandemic. 16 Although the world is now living in a post-pandemic era, clinical sequelae persist. Therefore, understanding the impact of COVID-19 on young people’s psychiatric functioning, crafting conceptual models to comprehend its influence, and developing clinical interventions for these repercussions are vitally important. This narrative review precisely focuses on summarizing data on depression, suicidal behavior, anxiety, and obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD) in global youth. A conceptual synthesis guided by the construct of intolerance of uncertainty follows the discussion of the literature. Finally, the review examines clinical implications for assessing and treating the psychological sequelae associated with the pandemic. Depression, suicidal behavior, anxiety, and obsessive-compulsive disorder spectrum in the peri-pandemic era The emotional and behavioral impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on pediatric patients, both in the United States and globally, was undeniable. 17,18 Youth who tested positive for COVID-19 experienced higher probabilities of any mental health diagnosis compared to their peers who did not test positive. 19 Zhang-James et al. 19 reported a higher Hazard Ratio for children (6.0, 95% confidence interval (CI): 5.8–6.3) than for adolescents (4.2, 95% CI: 4.1–4.4). This section summarizes research investigating depression, suicidal behavior, anxiety, and obsessive-compulsive behavior, presenting findings from various studies along with commentary on the limitations of the research. Depression The majority of the evidence suggests that depression and anxiety rates among youth did indeed rise during the pandemic, with depression taking center stage. 8 One review noted that worldwide prevalence rates of depression in school-age children ranged from 2.2% to 11.78%, 20 and a widely cited article reported that 25% of global youth surveyed experienced depressive symptoms. 10 Zolopa et al. 21 conducted a rapid review of publications encompassing youth from North America, Europe, East Asia, Australia, and Southwest Asia, concluding that 79% of publications noted an increased prevalence of depression. A recent qualitative investigation with 20 adolescents (ages 12–19 years) revealed that 70% of the respondents reported a loss of motivation. 22 Increased rates of internalizing disorders (e.g., anxiety, depression) were associated with higher levels of pandemic-related stressors, 23 and COVID-19-related stress predicted depression in a large sample of Canadian youth (B = 0.33, t = 11.49, p < 0.001). 24 Hawke et al. 25 stated that increased COVID-19 fears were related to elevated mood symptoms but not to levels of substance use. Psychiatric hospital admissions during the pandemic revealed higher rates and intensities of depression, suicidal behaviors, and trauma-related symptoms. 26 A systematic review claimed that between January and May 2020, the prevalence of depression in Chinese youth ranged from 11% to 45%. 12 In a cross-sectional survey study completed in April 2020, including 463 junior high school and high school students, Zhang et al. 27 found that 9.1% of junior high school students in China experienced moderate depressive symptoms, whereas 6.8% of their high school counterparts endorsed moderate depression. In terms of severe depression, 5.3% of the junior high school sample disclosed severe depression compared to 2.6% of the high school group. Chadi et al. 28 summarized results from various longitudinal studies and concluded that within the United Kingdom, levels of depression surged in the early phases of the pandemic (March 2020) and then receded by the summer of 2020. Forty-four percent of U.S. youth reported persistent sadness and/or hopelessness during the pandemic. American adolescents reported increased weekly feelings of depression during the peri-pandemic period. Females living in the United Kingdom were at greater risk for depression than their male peers (B = 1.64; CI = 95%). 29–31 Thirty-three percent of Australian adolescents surveyed reported depressive symptoms during the peri-pandemic period. 32 A mixed-methods investigation examining emotional reactions to the viral outbreak among transitional-aged Australian youth (16–25 years old) showed marked increases in depression. 33 Bell et al. 33 found that 44% of Australian adolescents in a non-clinical population and 63% from a clinical group met the criteria for depression as measured by the PHQ-4. Qualitative data showed that major concerns centered around social isolation, declines in mental health, and unsatisfactory efforts at self-care. In another review analyzing studies of youth from North American, European, and Asian countries, 14.4% of adolescents reported post-traumatic stress two weeks after the pandemic’s onset, with those in treatment for a major depressive episode particularly likely to experience trauma symptoms. 17 Additionally, Millner et al. 26 found that treatment stays lasted longer in the peri-pandemic period than in preceding years. Chadi et al. ’s 2022 meta-analysis found some recovery among depressive symptoms over the summer of 2020. 28 Suicidal behavior Suicide rates in pediatric patients apparently rose during the pandemic across Europe, North America, Asia, and Africa. 15,33–35 In particular, rates of suicidal behavior increased in the U.S., China, Australia, and Greece, while they decreased in Japan. 20 Suicidal ideation in adolescents and transitional-aged youth (ages 12–24 years) was assessed during the early stages of the pandemic in 2020. 35 The levels of suicidal ideation among these youth rose by 12.2% (adjusted odds ratio = 1.24, 95% CI: 1.15–1.35). Moreover, suicidal ideation was elevated more in older adolescents (>16 years, 15.3%) than in their younger cohorts (<16 years, 10.6%). Suicidal behavior and attempts in Canadian youth increased after containment measures ended. 15 Likewise, 20% of Australian adolescents reported suicidal behaviors. 31 In Catalonia, the rates of suicidal behavior among female youth rose by 195% during the first year of the pandemic compared to the prior year. 36 The U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention reported a 50.6% increase in emergency room visits for girls compared to a 3.7% rise for boys from 2019–2021. 37 Twenty percent of U.S. youth reported suicidal ideation, and 9% attempted suicide during the peri-pandemic period. 29 A very recent study showed that COVID-19 infection was linked to a two-fold increase in suicidal ideation among American children and adolescents. 19 In the United States, levels of suicidal behavior were associated with the length of school closures, with longer shutdowns correlating with greater suicidal behavior. 38 Table 1 below illustrates the salient findings. 10,12,15,19,20,27,29–33 Table 1 The wide prevalence of depression during the COVID-19 pandemic. Each row represents prevalence data from specific regions Clinical condition Region Prevalence Reference Depression Worldwide 25% of youth reported depressive symptoms in a large study 2.2–11.78% of youth reported depressive symptoms 10 , 20 United States 44% of youth endorsed hopelessness and sadness Increased weekly reports of depression by youth 29 , 30 China 11–45% of youth reported depressive symptoms 12 9.1 % of junior high and 6.8% of senior high students reported depressive symptoms 27 Australia 33% of youth endorsed symptoms of depression 44% in non-clinical group and 63% in clinical group reported depressive symptoms 32 , 33 Suicide Worldwide Rise in Self-Injurious Behavior (SIB) in North America, Europe, Asia and Africa 15 , 31 Australia 20% of youth experienced suicidal ideation 31 United States 20% of youth reported suicidal Rate of suicidal ideation doubled 19 , 29 Anxiety Demaria et al. 4 noted in their narrative review, “The impact on overthinking and on excessive worry was exceptionally strong during the first wave of the pandemic.” Indeed, approximately 20% of youth worldwide reported symptoms of anxiety during the pandemic, 10 and published studies found anxiety disorders in 1.8–23.87% of the population. 19 A national survey of Generation Z teens in the U.S. indicated that 43% of these adolescents experienced increased stress during the pandemic. 39 Large increases in the rates of weekly anxiety were found in the U.S. 30 More specifically, anxiety was highly prevalent among American children and adolescents who tested positive for COVID-19. 19 Early in the pandemic (April 2020), over 1,000 Canadian youth were surveyed, and 43% of the sample reported being “very concerned” about the viral outbreak. 24 Anxiety increased by 32% in a sample of Danish youth. 40 Nonetheless, anxiety was not limited to the initial phases of the pandemic; there was a substantial increase in Canadian pediatric patients’ emotional problems throughout the peri-pandemic period, 41 during which 20% of Australian adolescents likewise experienced anxiety. 32 COVID-19 generated a psychological response that likely encompasses more than traditional symptoms of anxiety. 42 A March 2020 online assessment of over 1,000 U.S. children revealed some significant findings, namely that worries tended to center around fears of infecting others, spreading the disease, and concerns about personal health. 43 Overall, the number of anxious youth in China appeared relatively low (8%). 12 However, in one cross-sectional analysis of 463 youth, approximately 10% of the junior high cohort reported moderate or severe anxiety, while nearly 11% of their high school counterparts reported moderate anxiety, and 7.2% stated they were severely anxious. 27 Additionally, high rates of post-traumatic stress disorder and generalized anxiety disorder (GAD) were discovered among Chinese children and adolescents after the COVID-19 outbreak. 44 Hawke et al. ’s latent class analysis of COVID-19 worry trajectories in Canadian adolescents and transitional-aged youth identified several trends. 24 Youth reported heightened worries during the initial peak of the pandemic in Spring 2020, a decline over the summer, and then a significant increase in COVID-19 worries associated with the Fall 2020 surge. About 35% of a 600-person sample fell into the lowest-worry category, which tended to include more boys and adolescents from small cities or rural areas. Nearly 13% fell into the highest-worry category and also experienced the sharpest increase in worries in October. This group tended to include girls, gender-diverse individuals, those living in suburbs or big cities, or those with baseline internalizing or externalizing disorders. No differences in COVID-19 worries were found based on age, ethnicity, language, employment, living situation, physical health, or substance use. Symptoms of OCD also worsened during the pandemic. 4,45–49 During such times, individuals naturally worry about contamination, viral spread, and inadequate viral mitigation efforts. 46 Given that contamination obsessions and cleaning compulsions were some of the most common symptoms of OCD both before and during the pandemic, this surge in symptoms is not surprising. 14 Youth with OCD also faced a significant change in social messaging around the threat of contamination, in addition to the genuinely increased risk. A significant portion of Canadian youth with OCD experienced symptom deterioration during the pandemic, ranging from 38% to 73%. 41,45 In a recent systematic review, most studies reported that more youth experienced worsening symptoms than improvement. 14 Several factors predicted worsening OCD symptoms, including poor insight combined with obsessions involving aggressive or sexual themes. 41 There is mixed evidence regarding the effect of gender on OCD deterioration, with some studies finding more prevalent obsessive-compulsive symptoms in girls and women, while others found more frequent new diagnoses of OCD in boys and men. 44,45 One study suggested that youth whose symptoms worsened tended to have family histories of ADHD and be younger. 40 Tomczak et al. 49 examined parents’ and children’s (ages 6–18 years) reactions to the COVID-19 pandemic using data from the Boston Children’s Hospital Department of Neurology and the Pediatric OCD clinic at Massachusetts General. They concluded that children with a singular diagnosis of OCD reported higher levels of anxiety and depression during the viral outbreak than did children with both OCD and a tic disorder. However, both groups experienced significant emotional impact due to the pandemic. A recent single-center retrospective study conducted in Turkey found increasing rates of OCD and somatic disorders ( p < 0.001). 11 Additionally, obsessions, fear of the virus, sleep problems, and somatic complaints intensified among Turkish youth. 50 Finally, a third study conducted with nearly 600 Turkish adolescents examined the effect of COVID-19 on OCD. 51 The results revealed several compelling findings. First, incidences of OCD increased during the pandemic. However, more nuanced and complex outcomes were discovered. Through a mediation analysis, COVID-19 stress predicted emotional reactivity (B = 0.50, p < 0.01), which in turn was linked to experiential avoidance (B = 0.59, p < 0.01) as well as depression/anxiety (B = 0.81, p < 0.01). Research in Denmark involving a sample of youth from a specialized clinic and a group surveyed from the general population found that 44.6% of the clinic group reported worsening OCD symptoms, 32.3% reported increased anxiety, 33.8% indicated exacerbated depression, and 18.5% noted increased avoidance. 40 Additionally, these investigators found that 15.4% of newly diagnosed children and adolescents with OCD reported that thoughts about COVID-19 played a central role in their condition. This phenomenon, along with deepening anxiety and depression, predicted the aggravation of OCD. Table 2 summarizes the relevant findings. 10,12,19,27,39-41 Table 2 Snapshot of the prevalence of anxiety and Obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD) during the COVID-19 pandemic. Each row represents prevalence data in specific regions Clinical condition Region Prevalence Reference Anxiety Worldwide 20% of youth noted symptoms of anxiety 1.8–23.9% of youth experienced anxious symptoms 10 , 19 United States 43% of teens report stress 39 Denmark Increase of 32% in anxious youth 40 China Low rate (8%) in one study 10% of junior high school students reported moderate to severe anxiety 7.2 of high school students reported moderate/severe anxiety 12 , 27 Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder Denmark 44.6% of adolescents with OCD experienced symptom exacerbation 40 Canada 38–73% of adolescents with OCD reported symptom exacerbation 41 Typical long-term outcomes of depression and anxiety in youth Examining the characteristic trajectories of depression and anxiety in pediatric populations provides valuable context. In their review, Walter et al. 52 reported that untreated anxiety in youth leads to impaired social functioning, educational achievement, physical health, and mental health. More specifically, they noted that 9% of adolescents experience suicidal ideation and 6% attempt suicide. Typically, anxiety disorders such as GAD, social anxiety, and separation anxiety decrease during adolescence, whereas depression tends to increase during this period. 53 In the U.S., adolescent depression is associated with multiple clinical sequelae, including eating disorders, substance use (e.g., nicotine, alcohol, street drugs, prescription medications), physical health conditions (e.g., cardiovascular issues, obesity), lowered academic achievement, and recurrent depressive episodes in adulthood. 54 The presence of depression may exacerbate anxiety disorders. 53 Clearly, the most serious consequence of persistent depression and anxiety is suicidal behavior. 55 Limitations of the reviewed research The research literature covering the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on pediatric anxiety and depression is not without limitations. A common concern in many of the studies involves the representativeness of the sample. Studies with smaller sample sizes suffer from inadequate power, and many larger-scale investigations are compromised by a lack of racially and ethnically diverse participants. This is particularly unfortunate given that the pandemic disproportionately affected marginalized populations. 2,56 These individuals and families experienced greater exposure to infection due to their front-line worker status, as well as food insecurity, mandated work furloughs, lack of healthcare coverage, hate crimes, and various forms of oppression. 57,58 Therefore, selection bias may be a factor. Although recruitment for research during the pandemic was understandably challenging, future research should strive for larger and more representative samples to enhance ecological validity and generalizability. The frequent use of cross-sectional designs represents another significant limitation of the literature. Similar to the challenges in recruiting, the pandemic made randomized and complex methodologies difficult to implement. However, all cross-sectional and quasi-experimental designs suffer from typical threats to internal and external validity, such as differential history and maturation. Moreover, reliable cause-and-effect relationships cannot be established. In particular, differential maturation jeopardizes sound conclusions in studies without follow-up components. 59 Therefore, follow-up and longitudinal evaluations are crucial in the post-pandemic period. Additional limitations pertain to measurement issues and the timing of assessment. First, there appears to be an over-reliance on questionnaire data rather than observational or behavioral measures. Second, most studies depend on parental or youth self-report data, which introduces the potential for response bias. Finally, considerable variability in the timing of data points between studies makes cross-comparisons challenging. Theoretical synthesis: Making sense of the literature From infancy, humans learn to perceive uncertain situations as dangerous. 60 Indeed, individuals may be hard-wired to be wary of uncertainty, which could represent an evolutionary adaptation. 60–62 Unknown circumstances often trigger fear, and doubt becomes highly distressing. 63–66 Given the various ways pandemics create uncertainty and Korte et al. ’s observation that “Uncertainty and health-related anxieties grow organically in the peri- and post-pandemic periods”, 9,65 the construct of intolerance of uncertainty (IU) may offer a unique insight into the psychological consequences of pandemics. IU refers to the fear of unknown, unpredictable, or ambiguous situations. 60,62 Heightened IU can lead to skewed attention and biased recall. 62 Scholars conceptualize IU as a dispositional or temperamental trait, 67,68 representing a diathesis for various psychopathological conditions and a potential transdiagnostic pathway. 62,65,66,69 IU is associated with multiple psychiatric diagnoses in youth, moderating the relationship between stressful events and anxiety. 68,70,71 For example, GAD is related to elevated levels of IU (r = 0.66) in 7- to 17-year-olds. 71 Additionally, IU predicted the emergence of GAD (B = 0.03, SE = 0.01, OR = 1.03) and was highly correlated with social anxiety. 70,71 Health anxiety also showed a significant correlation with IU (r = 0.80), which was associated with obsessive-compulsive symptoms (r = 0.63–0.69) in children and adolescents. 70,72 In particular, ordering, symmetry, washing, checking, and perfectionism were related to IU. 73,74 Moreover, eating disorders were found to be concomitant with IU, with coefficients ranging from 0.42 to 0.45. 75,76 Courtney et al. 77 asserted that anxiety and depression in youth increase during times of uncertainty. IU and symptoms of depression were similarly correlated, with coefficients ranging from 0.43 to 0.55. 75 Therefore, IU is clearly linked to multiple forms of distress. Pandemics are well known for generating various kinds of uncertainty at all levels of society. 9 Friedberg et al. 78 noted that “the COVID-19 virus is a tricky bug, and its frequent morphing into multiple variants that evade immunity breeds heightened levels of uncertainty.” Li et al. 79 conceptualized COVID-19-specific IU as a tendency to overestimate the threat of uncertainty in COVID-related experiences. A recent study concluded that during the pandemic, elevated IU was significantly associated with higher levels of anxiety in youth. 80 Paluszek et al. 81 proposed a COVID-stress syndrome characterized by emotional (e.g., fear of the virus, fear of foreigners who may transmit the virus) and behavioral (e.g., reassurance-seeking, checking COVID-19-related information) manifestations. Individuals with greater anxiety sensitivity and a diagnosis of an anxiety disorder reported more COVID-19-related stress—a relationship that high IU may amplify. 81,82 A recent project involving 234 5th- to 8th-grade Croatian youth uncovered a clear relationship between IU, anxiety, and COVID-related distress. 83 Additionally, a study of U.S. children found a very strong correlation between IU and thoughts/behaviors associated with COVID (r = 0.60, p < 0.001). 78 Uncertainty often accompanies illness. “This may be due to the unpredictability of the symptoms/course of illness or a lack of clarity about, for example, diagnosis, prognosis, treatment options, likely efficacy of treatment, roles within the care team, services available, responsibilities of patients and caregivers, their ability to engage in treatment, etc.” 60 This explanation aligns well with the early waves of the COVID-19 pandemic, which were characterized by high levels of unpredictability and ambiguity regarding diagnosis, prognosis, availability of services, and treatment efficacy. Our theoretical synthesis is fundamentally informed by the work of Korte et al. 65 Simply put, their model proposes that the pandemic served as a critical incident, and IU represented an individual diathesis (e.g., vulnerability factor) that catalyzed a variety of psychiatric symptoms, including anxiety, depression, contamination worries, hypervigilance, catastrophic predictions, somatic reactions, fears of losing control, helplessness, rumination, checking behaviors, and avoidance behaviors. Korte et al. 65 explained that IU could be a determinative or contributing factor to a host of conditions. Despite the ambiguity surrounding its mechanism of action, IU presents a compelling transdiagnostic treatment target. 84,85 Implications The existing literature unequivocally documents rising concerns about pediatric behavioral health. Pediatric medical clinics are often the first point of contact for treating these conditions, 20 and routine screening for emotional and behavioral disorders is therefore imperative. 86–88 Regular surveillance of symptoms offers numerous benefits, including early identification, improved accessibility, and more accountable treatment. 89 Self-report screeners provide both efficiency and solid psychometrics. 90 Preventive screening facilitates effective clinical decision-making and quality assurance. 88 Additionally, both caregivers and young patients generally favor screening efforts. 90 Given the surge in anxiety and depression rates due to COVID-19, several disorder-specific screening measures are recommended. The screen for child anxiety-related emotional disorders (SCARED) and the social phobia and anxiety inventory for children (SPAI-C) are suggested for anxiety spectrum disorders. 86–88,91,92 The SCARED is a 41-item broad-scale tool with robust psychometric properties and aligns well with Diagnostic Statistical Manual-5 criteria. 93 A brief 5-item version is particularly useful in integrated pediatric settings. 94,95 The SPAI-C, a well-regarded 26-item measure, assesses distress in social situations. 96 More specifically, the SPAI-C covers three factors: assertiveness/general conversation, traditional social encounters, and public performance. For depression screening, the Patient Health Questionnaire-9 (PHQ-9) and its adolescent version (PHQ-9A) are recommended. 87,88,97,98 Like the SCARED and SPAI-C, the PHQ-9 has strong psychometric foundations. 97,98 These instruments provide baseline metrics for targeted treatment planning and methods for tracking treatment progress, which is crucial in the post-pandemic period. Based on these measures’ psychometric properties, sensitivity to symptom presentation, accessibility, brevity, and recommendations from clinicians, 52,87,88 we advise practitioners to consider their use in the post-pandemic period. Despite the clear advantages of screening initiatives, there are reasons to be cautious about overzealous implementation. Clinics planning to assess pediatric patients for anxiety or depression need appropriate infrastructure to support these efforts. 88 For instance, these offices should be staffed with clinicians who can provide warm handoffs for further evaluation and/or intervention. 99 These providers should also be competent in cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT), which has long been considered the gold standard for treating psychiatric problems in pediatric patients. 100 In 2009, March predicted that “psychiatry will move to a unified cognitive-behavioral intervention model that is housed within neurosciences medicine”. 100 Pediatric depression is effectively treated by the CBT approach, which yields large effect sizes (g = 1.28–2.54). 101–104 Furthermore, CBT effectively mitigates anxiety and obsessive-compulsive disorder, also achieving large effect sizes. 64,103–106 “The CBT reservoir holds an array of brief, portable, effective, and engaging interventions for treating common childhood problems.” 100 Contemporary CBT includes a variety of modules, 65,84,107 offering a large supply of evidence-based interventions commonly grouped into psychoeducational, basic behavioral, cognitive restructuring, and exposure techniques. Psychoeducation informs pediatric patients about their condition and treatment options. Basic behavioral tasks are often the first methods used and target issues such as somatic tension, withdrawal, avoidance, impaired social functioning, and intolerance of distress. Cognitive restructuring aims to re-engineer thought content and logical reasoning processes. Exposure-based practices are powerful tools for mitigating inaccurate perceptions of threats, intolerance of uncertainty, difficulty managing distress, and maladaptive patterns of avoidance. Recent research has evaluated CBT interventions for children and adolescents experiencing psychological distress related to the COVID-19 pandemic. 65,84,85,108,109 Outcomes from a small but significant single-group pre-post design with 13- to 18-year-olds receiving a six-session CBT protocol are very encouraging, showing an 18-point decrease in anxiety and depression scores at post-test (95% CT; 6.17–30.10, t = 3.25, p < 0.006). 85 This data yielded a large effect size (g = 0.82), with 60% of participants showing improvement. Additionally, the approach reduced COVID-19-related fears (Y t = 4.45, p < 0.04, r = 0.046). A coping skills protocol for managing emotional distress (CC-19) was introduced early in the pandemic. 108 This intervention package included relaxation, psychoeducation, mindfulness, behavioral activation, and cognitive restructuring, with a particular focus on IU. Youth in the program learned to identify controllable circumstances, recognize and accept feelings and thoughts about events beyond their control, and develop productive problem-solving strategies for situations within their control. Preliminary results demonstrated the feasibility and acceptability of the approach. Wahlund et al. 109 piloted a brief CBT intervention for IU with twelve adolescents. Their protocol included worry awareness, education about the connection between IU and worry, and exposure to uncertainty. They found that the majority of their sample experienced reductions in IU, worry, and avoidance. Wahlund et al. 109 concluded that their program was feasible, acceptable, and effective. They noted that “relatively prompt exposure to situations involving uncertainty reduced worry and helped adolescents identify how they could increase their tolerance through behavioral change.” A series of clinical articles propose several innovative CBT procedures for alleviating emotional distress in the post-pandemic period. 65,84 These include novel cognitive restructuring interventions such as Mighty Predictions , Changing the Sign , Who’s Got the Germ , and Psychological Immunity Boosters , as well as creative exposure-based tasks such as Karaoke Worries, Musical Contaminants, and Germ Scavenger Hunt. While these strategies are promising and intriguing, they require further empirical testing and data-based support. Future Directions Ludlow et al. 85 explained in their 2023 paper, “The COVID-19 pandemic has shown that infectious disease outbreaks have broader implications than just physical health, with far-reaching psychosocial consequences that detrimentally impact the mental health of affected communities.” This assertion has proven particularly accurate concerning children and youth. Over the last three years, providers and patients worldwide have reported increasing rates of depression and anxiety, as well as their symptoms in non-clinical populations. 8,20–22,43,44 Likewise, obsessive-compulsive disorder has risen in prevalence, with previously existing patients deteriorating and COVID-19-related obsessions featuring prominently. 45,46 These trends, combined with a concurrent rise in suicidal behavior, 15,34 constitute an urgent imperative to find effective, scalable ways to intervene with at-risk youth. Future research must strengthen the predominantly cross-sectional literature base with further longitudinal and follow-up studies. Moreover, researchers should make explicit efforts to recruit youth who are underrepresented in existing data, which is mostly derived from online questionnaires. Youth who are undocumented, living in under-resourced households, or immigrants learning the language of their new homes may be unable to respond to online recruitment, and may simultaneously be at high risk for mental health deterioration due to the pandemic. The field cannot afford to leave them out of the recruitment pool moving forward. Similarly, researchers should investigate factors that may render certain groups especially vulnerable, such as those who are female or gender diverse. In addition to expanding research into the prevalence of pediatric depression, anxiety, suicidality, and obsessive-compulsive disorders, the future offers opportunities to explore promising interventions and settings. Studies should evaluate cutting-edge cognitive behavioral tools in a data-driven environment and continue investigating ways to improve intolerance of uncertainty, a formidable risk factor. Accordingly, researchers should establish best practices for successfully implementing effective CBT interventions in primary care settings. By leveraging the first lines of pediatric care, experts can more quickly identify children and adolescents in need of support. Existing data strongly suggests that when it comes to depression, anxiety, obsessive-compulsive disorder, and suicidality, there is no shortage of young people in need. Conclusions The COVID-19 pandemic caught the world unaware and subsequently unprepared. This once-in-a-century public health crisis produced exceedingly high morbidity and mortality rates. Moreover, as the preceding review documented, the viral outbreak’s clinical sequelae contributed to an increased prevalence of anxiety and depressive disorders in children and adolescents. Similar to past pandemics in human history, COVID-19 created significant uncertainty regarding diagnosis, contagion, prognosis, and treatment efficacy. Intolerance of uncertainty likely represented a diathesis or vulnerability factor that fueled anxiety and depression in pediatric patients. Fortunately, cognitive behavioral therapy offers an empirically sound psychosocial intervention to mitigate emotional distress in children and adolescents. While the findings and conclusions of multiple studies are valuable, if the data is not translated into better clinical care, the scholarly work’s impact diminishes. Consequently, the accrued knowledge lies inert. Clinical research should migrate toward state-of-the-science bedside interventions. Ideally, the material in this review will lead to improved conceptualization, assessment, and treatment for pediatric patients experiencing anxiety and depression associated with the COVID-19 pandemic. Declarations Acknowledgement None. Funding None. Conflict of interest Ms Mendelsohn and Ms Greenberger have nothing to disclose. Dr. Friedberg receives book royalties from Springer, Guilford, Routledge, John Wiley, and Professional Resource Press. He is on the speaking/training faculty of the Beck Institute for Cognitive Behavioral Therapy and Research and is a consultant to Kinark Child and Family Services. Authors’ contributions Conceptualization (AM, AG, RDF), formal analysis (AM, AG, RDF), investigation (AM, AG, RDF), methodology (AM, AG, RDF), original draft writing (AM, AG, RDF), reviewing and editing (AM, RDF), project administration (RDF), and supervision (RDF). References 1 Farooq S, Tunmore J, Wajid Ali M, Ayub M. Suicide, self-harm and suicidal ideation during COVID-19: A systematic review. Psychiatry Res 2021;306:114228 View Article PubMed/NCBI 2 United Stated Surgeon General. U.S Surgeon Generals’ advisory: Protecting youth mental health. Washington, DC: United Stated Surgeon General; 2021 View Article PubMed/NCBI 3 American Academy of Pediatrics & Children’s Hospital Association. Children and COVID-19: State data report -8/12/21. Washington, DC: American Academy of Pediatrics & Children’s Hospital Association; 2021 View Article PubMed/NCBI 4 Demaria F, Pontillo M, Di Vincenzo C, Di Luzio M, Vicari S. Hand Washing: When Ritual Behavior Protects! Obsessive-Compulsive Symptoms in Young People during the COVID-19 Pandemic: A Narrative Review. J Clin Med 2022;11(11):3191 View Article PubMed/NCBI 5 Haig-Ferguson A, Cooper K, Cartwright E, Loades ME, Daniels J. Practitioner review: health anxiety in children and young people in the context of the COVID-19 pandemic. Behav Cogn Psychother 2021;49(2):129-143 View Article PubMed/NCBI 6 Pinciotti CM, Riemann BC, Abramowitz JS. Intolerance of uncertainty and obsessive-compulsive disorder dimensions. J Anxiety Disord 2021;81:102417 View Article PubMed/NCBI 7 Riskind JH. Looming vulnerability to threat: a cognitive paradigm for anxiety. Behav Res Ther 1997;35(8):685-702 View Article PubMed/NCBI 8 Dubey S, Biswas P, Ghosh R, Chatterjee S, Dubey MJ, Chatterjee S, et al. Psychosocial impact of COVID-19. Diabetes Metab Syndr 2020;14(5):779-788 View Article PubMed/NCBI 9 Taylor S. The Psychology of Pandemics. Annu Rev Clin Psychol 2022;18:581-609 View Article PubMed/NCBI 10 Racine N, McArthur BA, Cooke JE, Eirich R, Zhu J, Madigan S. Global Prevalence of Depressive and Anxiety Symptoms in Children and Adolescents During COVID-19: A Meta-analysis. JAMA Pediatr 2021;175(11):1142-1150 View Article PubMed/NCBI 11 Ayraler Taner H, Akın Sarı B, Kaba D. How did the COVID-19 pandemic affect child and adolescent psychiatry outpatient clinic admissions? A single-center, retrospective study. Clin Child Psychol Psychiatry 2022;27(3):824-835 View Article PubMed/NCBI 12 Samji H, Wu J, Ladak A, Vossen C, Stewart E, Dove N, et al. Review: Mental health impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic on children and youth—a systematic review. Child Adolesc Ment Health 2022;27(2):173-189 View Article PubMed/NCBI 13 Radomski A, Cloutier P, Polihronis C, Sheridan N, Sundar P, Cappelli M. Meeting the service needs of youth with and without a self-reported mental health diagnosis during COVID-19. J Can Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry 2023;32(2):97-110 View Article PubMed/NCBI 14 Cunning C, Hodes M. The COVID-19 pandemic and obsessive-compulsive disorder in young people: Systematic review. Clin Child Psychol Psychiatry 2022;27(1):18-34 View Article PubMed/NCBI 15 Black TR, Virk P, Woodward ML, Stea JN, Doan Q. Commentary: School closures, the pandemic, and pediatric mental health: Scrutinizing the evidence. J Can Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry 2023;32(2):71-78 View Article PubMed/NCBI 16 Czeisler MÉ, Lane RI, Petrosky E, Wiley JF, Christensen A, Njai R, et al. Mental Health, Substance Use, and Suicidal Ideation During the COVID-19 Pandemic-United States, June 24-30, 2020. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 2020;69(32):1049-1057 View Article PubMed/NCBI 17 Bera L, Souchon M, Ladsous A, Colin V, Lopez-Castroman J. Emotional and Behavioral Impact of the COVID-19 Epidemic in Adolescents. Curr Psychiatry Rep 2022;24(1):37-46 View Article PubMed/NCBI 18 Jones EAK, Mitra AK, Bhuiyan AR. Impact of COVID-19 on Mental Health in Adolescents: A Systematic Review. Int J Environ Res Public Health 2021;18(5):2470 View Article PubMed/NCBI 19 Zhang-James Y, Clay JWS, Aber RB, Gamble HM, Faraone SV. Post-COVID-19 mental health distress in 13 million youth: A retrospective cohort study of electronic health records. J Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatr 2024 View Article PubMed/NCBI 20 Meade J. Mental Health Effects of the COVID-19 Pandemic on Children and Adolescents: A Review of the Current Research. Pediatr Clin North Am 2021;68(5):945-959 View Article PubMed/NCBI 21 Zolopa C, Burack JA, O’Connor RM, Corran C, Lai J, Bomfim E, DeGrace S, Dumont J, Larney S, Wendt DC. Changes in Youth Mental Health, Psychological Wellbeing, and Substance Use During the COVID-19 Pandemic: A Rapid Review. Adolesc Res Rev 2022;7(2):161-177 View Article PubMed/NCBI 22 Sobalvarro SS, Cepeda JA, Garcia JT, Jackson C, Shiang E, Chakravarti S, et al. The impact of COVID-19 on emotional, social, and behavioral health in adolescents with preexisting mental health concerns: A qualitative study. Clin Pract Pediatr Psychol 2023;11(2):228-238 View Article PubMed/NCBI 23 Haller SP, Archer C, Jeong A, Jaffe A, Jones EL, Harrewijn A, et al. Changes in Internalizing Symptoms During the COVID-19 Pandemic in a Transdiagnostic Sample of Youth: Exploring Mediators and Predictors. Child Psychiatry Hum Dev 2024;55(1):206-218 View Article PubMed/NCBI 24 Ellis WE, Dumas TM, Forbes LM. Physically isolated but socially connected: Psychological adjustment and stress among adolescents during the initial COVID-19 crisis. Can J Behav Sci 2020;52:177-187 View Article PubMed/NCBI 25 Hawke LD, Szatmari P, Cleverley K, Courtney D, Cheung A, Voineskos AN, et al. Youth in a pandemic: a longitudinal examination of youth mental health and substance use concerns during COVID-19. BMJ Open 2021;11(10):e049209 View Article PubMed/NCBI 26 Millner AJ, Zuromski KL, Joyce VW, Kelly F, Richards C, Buonopane RJ, et al. Increased severity of mental health symptoms among adolescent inpatients during COVID-19. Gen Hosp Psychiatry 2022;77:77-79 View Article PubMed/NCBI 27 Zhang C, Ye M, Fu Y, Yang M, Luo F, Yuan J, Tao Q. The psychological impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on teenagers in China. J Adolesc Health 2020;67:747-755 View Article PubMed/NCBI 28 Chadi N, Ryan NC, Geoffroy MC. COVID-19 and the impacts on youth mental health: emerging evidence from longitudinal studies. Can J Public Health 2022;113(1):44-52 View Article PubMed/NCBI 29 Jones SE, Ethier KA, Hertz M, DeGue J, Vi DL, Thornton J, Lim C, Dittus PJ, Geda G. Mental health, suicidality, and connectedness among high school students during the COVID-19 pandemic-Adolescent behaviors and experiences survey. United States January-June2021. MMWR Suppl 2022;71:16-21 View Article PubMed/NCBI 30 Bhandari N, Gupta S. Trends in Mental Wellbeing of US Children, 2019-2022: Erosion of Mental Health Continued in 2022. Int J Environ Res Public Health 2024;21(2):132 View Article PubMed/NCBI 31 Montero-Marin J, Hinze V, Mansfield K, Slaghekke Y, Blakemore SJ, Byford S, MYRIAD Team, et al. Young People’s Mental Health Changes, Risk, and Resilience During the COVID-19 Pandemic. JAMA Netw Open 2023;6(9):e2335016 View Article PubMed/NCBI 32 Fogarty A, Brown S, Gartland D, Mensah F, Seymour M, Savopoulos P, et al. Psychosocial factors associated with adolescent depressive and anxiety symptoms during the COVID-19 pandemic. Int J Behav Dev 2022;46(4):308-319 View Article PubMed/NCBI 33 Bell IH, Nicholas J, Broomhall A, Bailey E, Bendall S, Boland A, et al. The impact of COVID-19 on youth mental health: A mixed methods survey. Psychiatry Res 2023;321:115082 View Article PubMed/NCBI 34 Bersia M, Koumantakis E, Berchialla P, Charrier L, Ricotti A, Grimaldi P, et al. Suicide spectrum among young people during the COVID-19 pandemic: A systematic review and meta-analysis. EClinicalMedicine 2022;54:101705 View Article PubMed/NCBI 35 Lantos JD, Yeh HW, Raza F, Connelly M, Goggin K, Sullivant SA. Suicide Risk in Adolescents During the COVID-19 Pandemic. Pediatrics 2022;149(2):e2021053486 View Article PubMed/NCBI 36 Gracia R, Pamias M, Mortier P, Alonso J, Pérez V, Palao D. Is the COVID-19 pandemic a risk factor for suicide attempts in adolescent girls?. J Affect Disord 2021;292:139-141 View Article PubMed/NCBI 37 Yard E, Radhakrishnan L, Ballesteros MF, Sheppard M, Gates A, Stein Z, et al. Emergency Department Visits for Suspected Suicide Attempts Among Persons Aged 12-25 Years Before and During the COVID-19 Pandemic - United States, January 2019-May 2021. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 2021;70(24):888-894 View Article PubMed/NCBI 38 Dvir Y, Ryan C, Lee J. School Closures and ED Visits for Suicidality in Youths Before and During the COVID-19 Pandemic. JAMA Netw Open 2023;6(11):e2343001 View Article PubMed/NCBI 39 American Psychological Association. Stress in America 2020: A national mental crisis. Washington, DC: American Psychological Association; 2020 View Article PubMed/NCBI 40 Nissen JB, Højgaard DRMA, Thomsen PH. The immediate effect of COVID-19 pandemic on children and adolescents with obsessive compulsive disorder. BMC Psychiatry 2020;20(1):511 View Article PubMed/NCBI 41 Cost KT, Crosbie J, Anagnostou E, Birken CS, Charach A, Monga S, et al. Mostly worse, occasionally better: impact of COVID-19 pandemic on the mental health of Canadian children and adolescents. Eur Child Adolesc Psychiatry 2022;31(4):671-684 View Article PubMed/NCBI 42 Adamis AM, Cole DA, Olatunji BO. Intolerance of Uncertainty and Worry Prospectively Predict COVID-19 Anxiety and Distress: A 4-Year Longitudinal Study. Behav Ther 2024;55(2):320-330 View Article PubMed/NCBI 43 Waselewski E, Waselewski M, Harper C, Dickey S, Bell SA, Chang T. Perspectives of US Youth During Initial Month of the COVID-19 Pandemic. Ann Fam Med 2021;19(2):141-147 View Article PubMed/NCBI 44 Liu JJ, Bao Y, Huang X, Shi J, Lu L. Mental health considerations for children quarantined because of COVID-19. Lancet Child Adolesc Health 2020;4(5):347-349 View Article PubMed/NCBI 45 Storch EA, Sheu JC, Guzick AG, Schneider SC, Cepeda SL, Rombado BR, et al. Impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on exposure and response prevention outcomes in adults and youth with obsessive-compulsive disorder. Psychiatry Res 2021;295:113597 View Article PubMed/NCBI 46 Taylor S. The psychology of pandemics: Preparing for the next global outbreak of infectious disease. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge Scholars Publishing; 2019 View Article PubMed/NCBI 47 Darvishi E, Golestan S, Demehri F, Jamalnia S. A Cross-Sectional Study on Cognitive Errors and Obsessive-Compulsive Disorders among Young People During the Outbreak of Coronavirus Disease 2019. Act Nerv Super (2007) 2020;62(4):137-142 View Article PubMed/NCBI 48 Grant JE, Drummond L, Nicholson TR, Fagan H, Baldwin DS, Fineberg NA, et al. Obsessive-compulsive symptoms and the Covid-19 pandemic: A rapid scoping review. Neurosci Biobehav Rev 2022;132:1086-1098 View Article PubMed/NCBI 49 Tomczak KK, Worhach J, Thuy Trang Nguyen S, Liu S, Hoeppner S, Zhang B, et al. Subjective impact of COVID-19 pandemic on youth with tic and OCD spectrum disorders. Per Med Psychiatry 2023;39–40:100103 View Article PubMed/NCBI 50 İlbasmış Ç, Aksoy AT, Cihanyurdu İ, Ünver H, Rodopman A. COVID-19 salgınının çocukların ruh sağlığı üzerindeki etkileri. Turk J Child Adolesc Ment Health 2021;28(Suppl 1):1-3 View Article PubMed/NCBI 51 Seçer İ, Ulaş S. An Investigation of the Effect of COVID-19 on OCD in Youth in the Context of Emotional Reactivity, Experiential Avoidance, Depression and Anxiety. Int J Ment Health Addict 2021;19(6):2306-2319 View Article PubMed/NCBI 52 Walter HJ, Bukstein OG, Abright AR, Keable H, Ramtekkar U, Ripperger-Suhler J, et al. Clinical Practice Guideline for the Assessment and Treatment of Children and Adolescents With Anxiety Disorders. J Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry 2020;59(10):1107-1124 View Article PubMed/NCBI 53 McLaughlin KA, King K. Developmental trajectories of anxiety and depression in early adolescence. J Abnorm Child Psychol 2015;43(2):311-323 View Article PubMed/NCBI 54 Thapar A, Eyre O, Patel V, Brent D. Depression in young people. Lancet 2022;400(10352):617-631 View Article PubMed/NCBI 55 Dwyer JB, Stringaris A, Brent DA, Bloch MH. Annual Research Review: Defining and treating pediatric treatment-resistant depression. J Child Psychol Psychiatry 2020;61(3):312-332 View Article PubMed/NCBI 56 Phillips N, Park IW, Robinson JR, Jones HP. The Perfect Storm: COVID-19 Health Disparities in US Blacks. J Racial Ethn Health Disparities 2021;8(5):1153-1160 View Article PubMed/NCBI 57 Chavira DA, Ponting C, Ramos G. The impact of COVID-19 on child and adolescent mental health and treatment considerations. Behav Res Ther 2022;157:104169 View Article PubMed/NCBI 58 Jones K, Mallon S, Schnitzler K. A Scoping Review of the Psychological and Emotional Impact of the COVID-19 Pandemic on Children and Young People. Illn Crises Loss 2023;31(1):175-199 View Article PubMed/NCBI 59 Campbell DT, Stanley JC. Experimental and Quasi-experimental Designs for Research. Chicago, Ill: Rand McNally 1963 View Article PubMed/NCBI 60 Bottesi G, Iannattone S, Carraro E, Lauriola M. The assessment of Intolerance of uncertainty in youth: An examination of the Intolerance of Uncertainty Scale-Revised in Italian nonclinical boys and girls. Res Child Adolesc Psychopathol 2023;51(2):209-222 View Article PubMed/NCBI 61 Baker AE, Galván A. Threat or thrill? the neural mechanisms underlying the development of anxiety and risk taking in adolescence. Dev Cogn Neurosci 2020;45:100841 View Article PubMed/NCBI 62 DeSerisy M, Musial A, Comer JS, Roy AK. Functional connectivity of the anterior insula associated with intolerance of uncertainty in youth. Cogn Affect Behav Neurosci 2020;20(3):493-502 View Article PubMed/NCBI 63 Hearn CS, Donovan CL, Spence SH, March S, Holmes MC. What’s the Worry with Social Anxiety? Comparing Cognitive Processes in Children with Generalized Anxiety Disorder and Social Anxiety Disorder. Child Psychiatry Hum Dev 2017;48(5):786-795 View Article PubMed/NCBI 64 Kendall PC, Norris LA, Rabner JC, Crane ME, Rifkin LS. Intolerance of Uncertainty and Parental Accommodation: Promising Targets for Personalized Intervention for Youth Anxiety. Curr Psychiatry Rep 2020;22(9):49 View Article PubMed/NCBI 65 Korte C, Friedberg RD, Wilgenbusch T, Paternostro JK, Brown K, Kakolu A, et al. Intolerance of Uncertainty and Health-Related Anxiety in Youth amid the COVID-19 Pandemic: Understanding and Weathering the Continuing Storm. J Clin Psychol Med Settings 2022;29(3):645-653 View Article PubMed/NCBI 66 Freeston M, Tiplady A, Mawn L, Bottesi G, Thwaites S. Towards a model of uncertainty distress in the context of Coronavirus (COVID-19). Cogn Behav Therap 2020;13:e31 View Article PubMed/NCBI 67 Hawes MT, Farrell MR, Cannone JL, Finsaas MC, Olino TM, Klein DN. Early childhood temperament predicts intolerance of uncertainty in adolescence. J Anxiety Disord 2021;80:102390 View Article PubMed/NCBI 68 Osmanağaoğlu N, Creswell C, Dodd HF. Intolerance of Uncertainty, anxiety, and worry in children and adolescents: A meta-analysis. J Affect Disord 2018;225:80-90 View Article PubMed/NCBI 69 McEvoy PM, Hyett MP, Shihata S, Price JE, Strachan L. The impact of methodological and measurement factors on transdiagnostic associations with intolerance of uncertainty: A meta-analysis. Clin Psychol Rev 2019;73:101778 View Article PubMed/NCBI 70 Wright KD, Lebell MA, Carleton RN. Intolerance of uncertainty, anxiety sensitivity, health anxiety, and anxiety disorder symptoms in youth. J Anxiety Disord 2016;41:35-42 View Article PubMed/NCBI 71 Read KL, Comer JS, Kendall PC. The Intolerance of Uncertainty Scale for Children (IUSC): discriminating principal anxiety diagnoses and severity. Psychol Assess 2013;25(3):722-729 View Article PubMed/NCBI 72 Sperling J. The role of intolerance of uncertainty in treatment for pediatric anxiety disorders and obsessive-compulsive disorder. Evid Based Pract Child Adol Ment Hlth 2022;2:1215 View Article PubMed/NCBI 73 Cervin M, Perrin S, Olsson E, Aspvall K, Geller DA, Wilhelm S, et al. The Centrality of Doubting and Checking in the Network Structure of Obsessive-Compulsive Symptom Dimensions in Youth. J Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry 2020;59(7):880-889 View Article PubMed/NCBI 74 Pozza A, Albert U, Dèttore D. Perfectionism and Intolerance of Uncertainty are Predictors of OCD Symptoms in Children and Early Adolescents: A Prospective, Cohort, One-Year, Follow-Up Study. Clin Neuropsychiatry 2019;16(1):53-61 View Article PubMed/NCBI 75 Evans J, Horn K, Cowan D, Brunero S. Development of a clinical pathway for screening and integrated care of eating disorders in a rural substance use treatment setting. Int J Ment Health Nurs 2020;29(5):878-887 View Article PubMed/NCBI 76 Zhuo L, Wu Q, Le H, Li H, Zheng L, Ma G, et al. COVID-19-Related Intolerance of Uncertainty and Mental Health among Back-To-School Students in Wuhan: The Moderation Effect of Social Support. Int J Environ Res Public Health 2021;18(3):981 View Article PubMed/NCBI 77 Courtney D, Watson P, Battaglia M, Mulsant BH, Szatmari P. COVID-19 Impacts on Child and Youth Anxiety and Depression: Challenges and Opportunities. Can J Psychiatry 2020;65(10):688-691 View Article PubMed/NCBI 78 Friedberg RD, Thomas J, Tiller-Ormord J, Korte C, Brown K, Mendez E, et al. Parents’ and children’s intolerance of uncertainty and their reactions to COVID-19: A story of remarkable similarity. Clin Child Psychol Psychiatry 2023;28(4):1243-1256 View Article PubMed/NCBI 79 Li Q, Luo R, Zhang X, Meng G, Dai B, Liu X. Intolerance of COVID-19-Related Uncertainty and Negative Emotions among Chinese Adolescents: A Moderated Mediation Model of Risk Perception, Social Exclusion and Perceived Efficacy. Int J Environ Res Public Health 2021;18(6):2864 View Article PubMed/NCBI 80 Dorčić TM, Živčić-Bećirević I, Smojver-Ažić S. Anxiety in early adolescents during the Covid-19 pandemic: The role of intolerance of uncertainty and cognitive emotion regulation. Eur J Psychol Open 2023;8(2):45-55 View Article PubMed/NCBI 81 Paluszek MM, Asmundson AJN, Landry CA, McKay D, Taylor S, Asmundson GJG. Effects of anxiety sensitivity, disgust, and intolerance of uncertainty on the COVID stress syndrome: a longitudinal assessment of transdiagnostic constructs and the behavioural immune system. Cogn Behav Ther 2021;50(3):191-203 View Article PubMed/NCBI 82 Saulnier KG, Koscinski B, Volarov M, Accorso C, Austin MJ, Suhr JA, et al. Anxiety sensitivity and intolerance of uncertainty are unique and interactive risk factors for COVID-19 safety behaviors and worries. Cogn Behav Ther 2022;51(3):217-228 View Article PubMed/NCBI 83 Smojver-Azic S. Anxiety in early adolescents during the COVID-19 pandemic. Eur J Psychol Open 2023;82:45-56 View Article PubMed/NCBI 84 Barnowski A, Brown K, Movahedi Y, Friedberg RD. A Toolbox for Use During the Post-Pandemic Era: Preparing Youth for Re-entry. J Contemp Psychother 2023;54:10 View Article PubMed/NCBI 85 Ludlow C, Wardle B, Nedeljkovic M. Cognitive behaviour therapy for pandemic-related anxiety and depression in adolescents: a pilot study of a novel intervention. Aust Psychol 2023;59(1):60-72 View Article PubMed/NCBI 86 US Preventive Services Task Force. Screening for Anxiety in Children and Adolescents: US Preventive Services Task Force Recommendation Statement. JAMA 2022;328(14):1438-1444 View Article PubMed/NCBI 87 Mangione CM, Barry MJ, Nicholson WK, Cabana M, Chelmow D, Coker TR, US Preventive Services Task Force, et al. Screening for Depression and Suicide Risk in Children and Adolescents: US Preventive Services Task Force Recommendation Statement. JAMA 2022;328(15):1534-1542 View Article PubMed/NCBI 88 Trafalis S, Giannini C, Joves J, Portera S, Toyama H, Mehta A, et al. A pediatrician-friendly review of three common behavioral health screeners in pediatric practice: Findings and recommendations. Pediatr Investig 2021;5(1):58-64 View Article PubMed/NCBI 89 Burkhart K, Asogwa K, Muzaffar N, Gabriel M. Pediatric Integrated Care Models: A Systematic Review. Clin Pediatr (Phila) 2020;59(2):148-153 View Article PubMed/NCBI 90 Rush AJ. Isn’t It About Time to Employ Measurement-Based Care in Practice?. Am J Psychiatry 2015;172(10):934-936 View Article PubMed/NCBI 91 Wissow LS, Brown J, Fothergill KE, Gadomski A, Hacker K, Salmon P, et al. Universal mental health screening in pediatric primary care: a systematic review. J Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry 2013;52(11):1134-1147.e23 View Article PubMed/NCBI 92 Viswanathan M, Wallace IF, Cook Middleton J, Kennedy SM, McKeeman J, Hudson K, et al. Screening for Anxiety in Children and Adolescents: Evidence Report and Systematic Review for the US Preventive Services Task Force. JAMA 2022;328(14):1445-1455 View Article PubMed/NCBI 93 Birmaher B, Brent DA, Chiappetta L, Bridge J, Monga S, Baugher M. Psychometric properties of the Screen for Child Anxiety Related Emotional Disorders (SCARED): a replication study. J Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry 1999;38(10):1230-1236 View Article PubMed/NCBI 94 Ramsawh HJ, Chavira DA, Kanegaye JT, Ancoli-Israel S, Madati PJ, Stein MB. Screening for adolescent anxiety disorders in a pediatric emergency department. Pediatr Emerg Care 2012;28(10):1041-1047 View Article PubMed/NCBI 95 Ramsawh HJ, Chavira DA, Stein MB. Burden of anxiety disorders in pediatric medical settings: prevalence, phenomenology, and a research agenda. Arch Pediatr Adolesc Med 2010;164(10):965-972 View Article PubMed/NCBI 96 Beidel DC, Borden JW, Turner SM, Jacob RG. The Social Phobia and Anxiety Inventory: concurrent validity with a clinic sample. Behav Res Ther 1989;27(5):573-576 View Article PubMed/NCBI 97 Katon W, Richardson L, Russo J, McCarty CA, Rockhill C, McCauley E, Richards J, Grossman DC. Depressive symptoms in adolescence: the association with multiple health risk behaviors. Gen Hosp Psychiatry 2010;32(3):233-239 View Article PubMed/NCBI 98 Richardson LP, McCauley E, Grossman DC, McCarty CA, Richards J, Russo JE, et al. Evaluation of the Patient Health Questionnaire-9 Item for detecting major depression among adolescents. Pediatrics 2010;126(6):1117-1123 View Article PubMed/NCBI 99 Friedberg RD, Paternostro JK. Handbook of cognitive behavioral therapy for pediatric medical conditions. Cham, Switzerland: Springer Nature; 2019, 11-20 View Article PubMed/NCBI 100 March JS, Vitiello B. Clinical messages from the Treatment for Adolescents With Depression Study (TADS). Am J Psychiatry 2009;166(10):1118-1123 View Article PubMed/NCBI 101 March J, Silva S, Petrycki S, Curry J, Wells K, Fairbank J, et al. Fluoxetine, cognitive-behavioral therapy, and their combination for adolescents with depression: Treatment for Adolescents With Depression Study (TADS) randomized controlled trial. JAMA 2004;292(7):807-820 View Article PubMed/NCBI 102 March J, Silva S, Curry J, Wells K, Fairbank J, Treatment for Adolescents With Depression Study (TADS) Team, et al. The Treatment for Adolescents With Depression Study (TADS): outcomes over 1 year of naturalistic follow-up. Am J Psychiatry 2009;166(10):1141-1149 View Article PubMed/NCBI 103 Wergeland GJH, Riise EN, Öst LG. Cognitive behavior therapy for internalizing disorders in children and adolescents in routine clinical care: A systematic review and meta-analysis. Clin Psychol Rev 2021;83:101918 View Article PubMed/NCBI 104 Rith-Najarian LR, Mesri B, Park AL, Sun M, Chavira DA, Chorpita BF. Durability of Cognitive Behavioral Therapy Effects for Youth and Adolescents With Anxiety, Depression, or Traumatic Stress:A Meta-Analysis on Long-Term Follow-Ups. Behav Ther 2019;50(1):225-240 View Article PubMed/NCBI 105 Martinez RG, McNeil GD, Cornacchio D, Schneider BN, Peris TS. A Pilot Project to Integrate Individualized Measurement Into Measurement-Based Care in a Child Partial Hospitalization Program. Behav Ther 2024;55(1):191-200 View Article PubMed/NCBI 106 Swan AJ, Kendall PC, Olino T, Ginsburg G, Keeton C, Compton S, et al. Results from the Child/Adolescent Anxiety Multimodal Longitudinal Study (CAMELS): Functional outcomes. J Consult Clin Psychol 2018;86(9):738-750 View Article PubMed/NCBI 107 Friedberg RD. We’re not in Kansas anymore: Reimagining a new yellow brick road to treating youth and their families in the peri- and post-pandemic periods. Pract Innov 2021;6:275-287 View Article PubMed/NCBI 108 Rodriguez-Quintana N, Meyer AE, Bilek E, Flumenbaum R, Miner K, Scoville L, et al. Development of a Brief Group CBT Intervention to Reduce COVID-19 Related Distress Among School-Age Youth. Cogn Behav Pract 2021;28(4):642-652 View Article PubMed/NCBI 109 Wahlund T, Jolstedt M, Andersson E, Vigerland S, Perrin S, Öst LG, et al. Online cognitive behavior therapy for adolescents with excessive worry: a multiple baseline design feasibility study. Mhealth 2020;6:5 View Article PubMed/NCBI Copyright © 2024 Authors. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution-Noncommercial 4.0 License (CC BY-NC 4.0), permitting all non-commercial use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited. About this Article Cite this article Mendelsohn A, Greenberger A, Friedberg RD. Impact of the COVID-19 Pandemic on Pediatric Anxiety and Depression: Prevalence Data, Theoretical Synthesis, and Clinical Implications. Explor Res Hypothesis Med . 2024;9(4):328-337. doi: 10.14218/ERHM.2024.00004. Copied to clipboard Copy Export to RIS Export to EndNote Citation copied! Article History Received Revised Accepted Published January 19, 2024 August 1, 2024 August 23, 2024 September 19, 2024 DOI http://dx.doi.org/10.14218/ERHM.2024.00004 Exploratory Research and Hypothesis in Medicine pISSN 2993-5113 eISSN 2472-0712 < Previous Article Next Article > PDF 350 Full Article 3820 Table of Contents Abstract Introduction Depression, suicidal behavior, anxiety, and obsessive-compulsive disorder spectrum in the peri-pandemic era Typical long-term outcomes of depression and anxiety in youth Limitations of the reviewed research Theoretical synthesis: Making sense of the literature Implications Future Directions Conclusions Declarations References About the Article About XHP About Us Journals Membership News Services Contact Us Guidelines For Authors For Reviewers For Editors Ethics Editorial Policy Open Access Article Processing Charges Collaboration Collaborators Partners Resources Resources Center Reprints and Offprints Privacy Policy Feedback FAQ Alerts Submission © 2025 Xia & He Publishing Inc. Total visits : 3370121 Visits today : 3296 Back to Top Impact of the COVID-19 Pandemic on Pediatric Anxiety and Depression: Prevalence Data, Theoretical Synthesis, and Clinical Implications Alexandra Mendelsohn, Alanna Greenberger, Robert D. Friedberg Reset Zoom Download TIFF Cite this article Mendelsohn A, Greenberger A, Friedberg RD. Impact of the COVID-19 Pandemic on Pediatric Anxiety and Depression: Prevalence Data, Theoretical Synthesis, and Clinical Implications. Explor Res Hypothesis Med . 2024;9(4):328-337. doi: 10.14218/ERHM.2024.00004. Copied to clipboard Copy Export to RIS Export to EndNote Citation copied! Loading… Share this article Loading… Access & Citations 3820 Article Accesses Citation counts are provided from Dimensions. The counts may vary by service, and are reliant on the availability of their data. Counts will update daily once available. 350 PDF Download Loading…Coronavirus: Teens' anxiety levels dropped during pandemic, study finds Skip to content British Broadcasting Corporation Home News Sport Business Innovation Culture Arts Travel Earth Audio Video Live Home News Israel-Gaza War War in Ukraine US & Canada UK UK Politics England N. Ireland N. Ireland Politics Scotland Scotland Politics Wales Wales Politics Africa Asia China India Australia Europe Latin America Middle East In Pictures BBC InDepth BBC Verify Sport Business Executive Lounge Technology of Business Future of Business Innovation Technology Science & Health Artificial Intelligence AI v the Mind Culture Film & TV Music Art & Design Style Books Entertainment News Arts Arts in Motion Travel Destinations Africa Antarctica Asia Australia and Pacific Caribbean & Bermuda Central America Europe Middle East North America South America World’s Table Culture & Experiences Adventures The SpeciaList Earth Natural Wonders Weather & Science Climate Solutions Sustainable Business Green Living Audio Podcasts Radio Audio FAQs Video Live Live News Live Sport Home News Sport Business Innovation Culture Arts Travel Earth Audio Video Live Weather Newsletters Coronavirus: Teens' anxiety levels dropped during pandemic, study finds 24 August 2020 Share Save Share Save BBC Anxiety levels among young teenagers dropped during the coronavirus pandemic, a study has suggested. Thirteen to 14-year-olds were less anxious during lockdown than they had been last October, according to the University of Bristol survey. Researchers surveyed 1,000 secondary school children in south west England. They said the results were a "big surprise" and it raised questions about the impact of the school environment on teenagers' mental health. The findings come after Prof Chris Whitty, the UK's chief medical adviser, said children were more likely to be harmed by not returning to school than they were if they caught coronavirus. The UK's four chief medical officers have sought to allay parents' concerns ahead of schools reopening in England, Wales and Northern Ireland in the coming days. Schools in Scotland have already returned. And in a bid to encourage parents to send children back to school, Prime Minister Boris Johnson has said it is "vitally important" pupils return to the classroom, with the life chances of a generation at stake. What can we learn from schools that have reopened? Missing school is 'worse than virus for children' Schools let down by lack of 'plan B', says union Researchers compared findings from a survey taken in October last year to answers given by teenagers in May this year. Both girls and boys recorded decreased levels of anxiety during that timeframe. In October, 54% of 13 to 14-year-old girls and 26% of boys of the same age said they felt anxious. When surveyed in May - several weeks after schools shut to most pupils and nationwide lockdown restrictions came into force - the proportion dropped to 45% of girls and 18% of boys. Researchers questioned 1,000 year nine students from 17 secondary schools across the south west of England. 'Big surprise' "With the whole world in the grip of a devastating pandemic, which has thrown everyone's lives into turmoil, the natural expectation would be to see an increase in anxiety," said lead author Emily Widnall. "While we saw anxiety levels rise for a few of our participants, it was a big surprise to discover quite the opposite was the case for many of them." Ms Widnall said pupils who felt least connected to school before lockdown saw a larger decrease in anxiety, raising questions about how the school environment affects some younger teenagers' mental well-being. Some parents said their experience echoed the survey results. Rebecca from Cardiff, who has a son aged 14 with Asperger's Syndrome and a 12-year-old boy who is also on the autism spectrum, said both children were happy before but the drop in their stress levels has been "unbelievable". She said they sleep better and have fewer "teenage episodes", such as "shouting, screaming, not wanting to get ready for school, not wanting to get out of bed". Their grades have also improved because "removing the social side from education has allowed them to focus on the learning", Rebecca said, but added that they were fortunate to have a school which handled online learning well. Making school 'more supportive' Caroline Ryder, from Warwickshire, said her sons, aged 13 and 15, missed friends but had been happier and calmer, with less conflict over homework or school behaviour issues. She said they had kept busy during lockdown learning things from YouTube that were unrelated to the curriculum, such as growing vegetables, bread-making, sewing, home-brewing, carpentry and bicycle maintenance. "This whole episode has demonstrated to me that school, in its current format, is not a happy experience for many kids," she said. Others said their children had suffered from the lack of school, however. Dr Judi Kidger, from the University of Bristol, said: "Our findings raise questions about the role of the school environment in explaining rises in mental health difficulties among teenagers in recent years. "As schools reopen, we need to consider ways in which schools can be more supportive of mental health for all students." SCHOOLS: Which are re-opening, when? BUBBLES: How do they work and who can be in yours? SOCIAL DISTANCING: What are the rules now? LOOK-UP TOOL: How many cases in your area? There was a 2% decrease in boys at risk of depression and a 3% increase in girls at risk of depression. The findings have been published in a report for the National Institute for Health Research School for Public Health Research. Meanwhile, the UK's largest teaching union has accused the government of letting down pupils, teachers and parents by failing to have a "plan B" if infections rise. The National Education Union, which represents more than 450,000 members, said more staff, extra teaching space and greater clarity on what to do if there is a spike in cases is needed for schools to reopen safely. It is expected that pupils in Northern Ireland going into years seven, 12 and 14 will return to school full-time on Monday, with the rest going back from 31 August. In England and Wales, pupils will return to school from 1 September. SUMMER PLANS CANCELLED?: Joe Wicks is here for you - bringing you sunshine in a podcast GCSE AND A LEVEL STRESS: How to deal with exam result emotions Are you a young person who suffers from anxiety? Are you a parent of a teenager who has anxiety? Email haveyoursay@bbc.co.uk . Please include a contact number if you are willing to speak to a BBC journalist. You can also get in touch in the following ways: WhatsApp: +44 7756 165803 Tweet: @BBC_HaveYourSay Please read our terms & conditions and privacy policy If you are reading this page and can't see the form you will need to visit the mobile version of the BBC website to submit your question or comment or you can email us at HaveYourSay@bbc.co.uk . Please include your name, age and location with any submission. Pubs 'may need to shut' to allow schools to reopen Coronavirus will be 'with us forever' - scientist British Broadcasting Corporation Home News Sport Business Innovation Culture Arts Travel Earth Audio Video Live Weather BBC Shop BritBox BBC in other languages Follow BBC on: Terms of Use About the BBC Privacy Policy Cookies Accessibility Help Contact the BBC Advertise with us Do not share or sell my info Contact technical support Copyright 2025 BBC. All rights reserved. The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites. Read about our approach to external linking.Factchecking Kenya’s chief justice on judiciary funding and backlog of cases - Africa Check Skip to main content English Français Main navigation Fact-checks Reports Factsheets Guides Spot Checks Blog Meta programme fact-checks Republish our work Who we are Our team Our impact How we are funded Partners Get in touch What we do Info Finder African Fact-Checking Awards Corrections Fact-checking research Training Media Literacy Educator knowledge hub How we fact-check Corrections policy Code of principles How we rate claims Get Involved Donate Submit a claim to fact-check Partner with us Join our team Fact-checking tips Quizzes Donate Back to Africa Check Factchecking Kenya’s chief justice on judiciary funding and backlog of cases Published on 17 September 2020 Claim Six claims about the Kenyan judiciary, from its budget and number of cases to how many judges and magistrates serve Kenya’s population. Verdict Four correct, one understated and one unproven Source Kenya’s chief justice, David Maraga (August 2020) This article is more than 4 years old Maraga was largely correct about the judiciary budget and how many Kenyans are served per judge and magistrate in the country. The chief justice was also correct that the number of cases filed in Kenyan courts every year exceeds the number of cases the judiciary settles by as much as 100,000, causing an ever-growing backlog. But there isn’t evidence of a global average for comparing the number of judges and magistrates per population – there are too many variables in different legal systems. To mark the tenth anniversary of Kenya’s constitution , broadcaster NTV interviewed current and former government officials on how the law has been applied. Chief justice David Maraga told NTV that while the 2010 constitution had sought to strengthen the judiciary’s independence, funding was a perennial headache. “[Budget cuts] hit the judiciary sometimes to a point that its operations grind to a halt,” Maraga said in the interview , published in August 2020. In recent months the chief justice has been vocal on how cuts have hampered the delivery of judicial services. In his interview, Maraga made several claims. We looked into their accuracy. Claim The judiciary does not even get 1% of the national budget Verdict correct Maraga, who assumed office in 2016, asked for more funding as “the judiciary does not even get 1% of the national budget”. “We have said, over and over again, that for the judiciary to operate properly we should get at least 2.5% of the national budget,” he said . Africa Check has previously found there isn’t a “recommended global percentage” of funding for the judiciary from the national budget. In 2018 Maraga also claimed it was 2.5%. To determine how much has been allocated to the judiciary in recent years we consulted the appropriation acts, the laws that show budget allocations to government departments. For the national budget, we checked budget statements. Judiciary amounts as share of Kenya budget Year Judiciary budget (KSh billion) National budget (KSh trillion) Share 2014/15 17.5 1.58 1.1% 2015/16 16.7 2 0.8% 2016/17 17.3 2.3 0.8% 2017/18 17.6 2.3 0.8% 2018/19 14.5 2.6 0.6% 2019/20 18.9 2.8 0.7% 2020/21 17.4 2.8 0.6% Sources: Budget speeches for 2020 , 2019 , 2018 , 2017 , 2016 , 2015 and 2014 and Appropriations Acts for 2020, 2019 , 2018 , 2017 , 2016 , 2015 and 2014 . Note: The figures shown have been rounded up. Only once in the last seven financial years, in 2014/15, did the judiciary receive more than 1% of the national budget. We therefore rate this claim as correct. Claim We have an average of 400,000 cases being filed in our courts every year Verdict correct The most recent state of the judiciary report covers the 2018/19 financial year. Released in January 2020, it shows that more than two million cases were lodged in all courts between 2014/15 and 2018/19. The report said : “The number of filed cases provides quantitative information on the extent of demand for court services by the public.” Total number of cases filed in the judiciary Financial year Cases 2014/15 334,685 2015/16 460,961 2016/17 344,180 2017/18 402,243 2018/19 484,349 Average 405,283 The average number of cases filed in the period covered by the report works out to 405,283 a year. We therefore rate this claim as correct. Claim We only dispose of about 300,000 cases Verdict correct Discussing the country’s case backlog, Maraga said the judiciary settles about 300,000 cases every year. This number was determined by the number of judges and magistrates and would only continue to pile up. “Unless the judiciary is given enough resources to have enough manpower, Kenyans will continue crying about delayed cases,” he said . The most recent state of the judiciary report has data covering 2014/15 to 2018/19. It shows an average of 321,652 cases settled across the five financial years. As of 2018/19 there were 153 judges and 546 magistrates in Kenya. Number of cases resolved by the judiciary Financial year Cases 2014/15 272,605 2015/16 191,625 2016/17 304,182 2017/18 370,488 2018/19 469,359 Average 321,652 We therefore rate the claim as correct. Claim In Kenya now with a population of about 48 million, we have one judge serving over 300,000 people Verdict correct There are 47.6 million people in Kenya, according to 2019 census data. The most recent data from the judiciary shows there were 153 judges as of June 2019. This works out to one judge for every 311,000 people. We rate this claim as correct. Claim We have one magistrate serving over 77,000 people Verdict understated The most recent data from the judiciary shows there were 546 magistrates in Kenya as of June 2019. The state of the judiciary report was released in January 2020. Using a population of 47.6 million , this works out to one magistrate for every 87,114 people. The chief justice’s figure was off by over 10,000 but it was still “over 77,000” people per magistrate. We therefore rate it as understated. Claim There is a ‘global average’ for the number of judges and magistrates to number of people Verdict unproven A calculation for a “global average” can be achieved by directly comparing the number of judges and magistrates to the world population. But to account for population differences, rates (per 100,000 people) are widely used . ( Note: See box below for more context. ) The chief justice has in the past spoken of a “recommended global percentage” of funding for the judiciary. We have contacted the judiciary for the source of the "global average" cited by the chief justice and will update this report with their response. Wachira Maina is a constitutional lawyer in Kenya who has written about the progress of institutions, including the judiciary, following the adoption of the 2010 constitution. He directed us to the UN Office of Drug and Crime (UNODC) for data on the administration of justice professionals against a country’s population. It shows there were 1.3 judges or magistrates for every 100,000 people in Kenya in 2014, 3.6 for South Africa in 2015, and 0.8 for the US and 8.7 for China in 2017. But the UNODC noted key weaknesses in the data when comparing countries. “The numbers reported are not restricted to judges deciding criminal cases,” it said. “The comparability problem might get even worse because some countries might still only report the number of judges whose duty is the judgment of criminal cases. “Apart from this, it is not clear whether really all judges are included in the reported figures in all countries.” Without a source for the chief justice’s claim of a global average, we can only rate this final claim as unproven. Is calculating the ratio of judges and magistrates to the population useful? The ratio of judges and magistrates to the population is useful depending on what you’re using it to show, Wachira Maina , a constitutional lawyer in Kenya told Africa Check. He gave an example of using the ratio of the number of doctors to the population as a metric for access to health, and of police officers to measure access to security services. However, he said, ratio data leaves a lot unstated, such as the distribution by region and by urban and rural areas. Therefore “to determine access to services, you will almost certainly need additional information”. “A high ratio by itself does not prove that most people have access to services, merely that if services were equitably distributed, and they rarely are, more people would have access,” Maina said. “Keep in mind though that you cannot increase access unless you have the numbers, so the ratio does still say something useful.” Chris Kerkering is a litigation manager at Katiba Institute , an organisation in Nairobi that promotes the knowledge of Kenya’s constitution. He told Africa Check that population does not automatically equate to a judge’s caseload. A very litigious society would have more cases per population, he said. Caseload and caseload weighting, which Kerkering described as not only counting the number of cases but also being able to determine how much time each respective case would take , may be the best way to determine whether a judiciary has the appropriate number of judges. But since doing a comparison between different countries with different legal systems and different cultures would be near impossible, “judges per population is a decent aggregate”, Kerkering said. He said the chief justice’s focus was on access to justice. “If there are not enough judges and the staff that support them then they are unable to provide the services that the judiciary requires. Case backlogs become one of the more obvious problems. Fewer judges mean that each judge is taking more cases.” “The more cases a judge has, the more time it takes to get through them. Access to justice requires timely decisions. The phrase ‘justice delayed is justice denied,’ is so commonly used for a reason. Often, as a case winds its way through the court system, avoidable delays result in long term harm.” “A judiciary that can’t get through its caseload promptly can’t ensure access to justice as required by the constitution.” Carlos Mureithi is a journalist based in Nairobi, Kenya Further reading: https://africacheck.org/reports/budget-cuts-hit-kenyas-judiciary-but-theres-no-global-funding-target/ Republish our content for free We believe that everyone needs the facts. You can republish the text of this article free of charge, both online and in print. However, we ask that you pay attention to these simple guidelines . In a nutshell: 1. Do not include images, as in most cases we do not own the copyright. 2. Please do not edit the article. 3. Make sure you credit "Africa Check" in the byline and don't forget to mention that the article was originally published on africacheck.org . Name Surname Email Leave this field blank Carlos Mureithi Claim Six claims about the Kenyan judiciary, from its budget and number of cases to how many judges and magistrates serve Kenya’s population. Verdict Four correct, one understated and one unproven Source Kenya’s chief justice, David Maraga (August 2020) Join us on WhatsApp Further Reading false Nigeria Trump USAid funding No, Trump cut USAid funding to Nigeria – and elsewhere – because of US interests, not because of corrupt Nigerian politicians false South Africa HIV HIV/AIDS United States funding government false claim No, 100% of South Africa’s HIV/Aids funding does not come from the United States – mostly funded by the South African government Nigeria budget debt policing Osita Chidoka aviation minister Fact-checking former minister Osita Chidoka's claims on Nigeria's 2025 budget, debt and policing Add new comment Your name Comment About text formats Restricted HTML Allowed HTML tags: <a href hreflang> <em> <strong> <cite> <blockquote cite> <code> <ul type> <ol start type> <li> <dl> <dt> <dd> <h2 id> <h3 id> <h4 id> <h5 id> <h6 id> Lines and paragraphs break automatically. Web page addresses and email addresses turn into links automatically. limit: 600 characters Leave this field blank Sign up to our newsletter Name Africa Check values your trust and is committed to the responsible management, use and protection of personal information. See our privacy policy. Leave this field blank Spot Checks View All false Nigeria Trump USAid funding No, Trump cut USAid funding to Nigeria – and elsewhere – because of US interests, not because of corrupt Nigerian politicians false South Africa HIV HIV/AIDS United States funding government false claim No, 100% of South Africa’s HIV/Aids funding does not come from the United States – mostly funded by the South African government Nigeria budget debt policing Osita Chidoka aviation minister Fact-checking former minister Osita Chidoka's claims on Nigeria's 2025 budget, debt and policing We hold public figures accountable For democracy to function, public figures need to be held to account for what they say. The claims they make need to be checked, openly and impartially. Africa Check is an independent, non-partisan organisation which assesses claims made in the public arena using journalistic skills and evidence drawn from the latest online tools, readers, public sources and experts, sorting fact from fiction and publishing the results. Browse by category Health Covid-19 Education Crime Economy Kenya Nigeria Senegal South Africa Sign up to our newsletter Name Africa Check values your trust and is committed to the responsible management, use and protection of personal information. See our privacy policy. Leave this field blank Follow us Facebook Twitter Instagram TikTok Footer About Partner With Us Terms and Conditions Contact Us Sitemap Want to keep reading our fact-checks? We will never charge you for verified, reliable information. Help us keep it that way by supporting our work. Become a newsletter subscriber Name Africa Check values your trust and is committed to the responsible management, use and protection of personal information. See our privacy policy. Leave this field blank Support independent fact-checking in Africa. See our donation optionsFactchecking Kenya’s chief justice on judiciary funding and backlog of cases - Africa Check Skip to main content English Français Main navigation Fact-checks Reports Factsheets Guides Spot Checks Blog Meta programme fact-checks Republish our work Who we are Our team Our impact How we are funded Partners Get in touch What we do Info Finder African Fact-Checking Awards Corrections Fact-checking research Training Media Literacy Educator knowledge hub How we fact-check Corrections policy Code of principles How we rate claims Get Involved Donate Submit a claim to fact-check Partner with us Join our team Fact-checking tips Quizzes Donate Back to Africa Check Factchecking Kenya’s chief justice on judiciary funding and backlog of cases Published on 17 September 2020 Claim Six claims about the Kenyan judiciary, from its budget and number of cases to how many judges and magistrates serve Kenya’s population. Verdict Four correct, one understated and one unproven Source Kenya’s chief justice, David Maraga (August 2020) This article is more than 4 years old Maraga was largely correct about the judiciary budget and how many Kenyans are served per judge and magistrate in the country. The chief justice was also correct that the number of cases filed in Kenyan courts every year exceeds the number of cases the judiciary settles by as much as 100,000, causing an ever-growing backlog. But there isn’t evidence of a global average for comparing the number of judges and magistrates per population – there are too many variables in different legal systems. To mark the tenth anniversary of Kenya’s constitution , broadcaster NTV interviewed current and former government officials on how the law has been applied. Chief justice David Maraga told NTV that while the 2010 constitution had sought to strengthen the judiciary’s independence, funding was a perennial headache. “[Budget cuts] hit the judiciary sometimes to a point that its operations grind to a halt,” Maraga said in the interview , published in August 2020. In recent months the chief justice has been vocal on how cuts have hampered the delivery of judicial services. In his interview, Maraga made several claims. We looked into their accuracy. Claim The judiciary does not even get 1% of the national budget Verdict correct Maraga, who assumed office in 2016, asked for more funding as “the judiciary does not even get 1% of the national budget”. “We have said, over and over again, that for the judiciary to operate properly we should get at least 2.5% of the national budget,” he said . Africa Check has previously found there isn’t a “recommended global percentage” of funding for the judiciary from the national budget. In 2018 Maraga also claimed it was 2.5%. To determine how much has been allocated to the judiciary in recent years we consulted the appropriation acts, the laws that show budget allocations to government departments. For the national budget, we checked budget statements. Judiciary amounts as share of Kenya budget Year Judiciary budget (KSh billion) National budget (KSh trillion) Share 2014/15 17.5 1.58 1.1% 2015/16 16.7 2 0.8% 2016/17 17.3 2.3 0.8% 2017/18 17.6 2.3 0.8% 2018/19 14.5 2.6 0.6% 2019/20 18.9 2.8 0.7% 2020/21 17.4 2.8 0.6% Sources: Budget speeches for 2020 , 2019 , 2018 , 2017 , 2016 , 2015 and 2014 and Appropriations Acts for 2020, 2019 , 2018 , 2017 , 2016 , 2015 and 2014 . Note: The figures shown have been rounded up. Only once in the last seven financial years, in 2014/15, did the judiciary receive more than 1% of the national budget. We therefore rate this claim as correct. Claim We have an average of 400,000 cases being filed in our courts every year Verdict correct The most recent state of the judiciary report covers the 2018/19 financial year. Released in January 2020, it shows that more than two million cases were lodged in all courts between 2014/15 and 2018/19. The report said : “The number of filed cases provides quantitative information on the extent of demand for court services by the public.” Total number of cases filed in the judiciary Financial year Cases 2014/15 334,685 2015/16 460,961 2016/17 344,180 2017/18 402,243 2018/19 484,349 Average 405,283 The average number of cases filed in the period covered by the report works out to 405,283 a year. We therefore rate this claim as correct. Claim We only dispose of about 300,000 cases Verdict correct Discussing the country’s case backlog, Maraga said the judiciary settles about 300,000 cases every year. This number was determined by the number of judges and magistrates and would only continue to pile up. “Unless the judiciary is given enough resources to have enough manpower, Kenyans will continue crying about delayed cases,” he said . The most recent state of the judiciary report has data covering 2014/15 to 2018/19. It shows an average of 321,652 cases settled across the five financial years. As of 2018/19 there were 153 judges and 546 magistrates in Kenya. Number of cases resolved by the judiciary Financial year Cases 2014/15 272,605 2015/16 191,625 2016/17 304,182 2017/18 370,488 2018/19 469,359 Average 321,652 We therefore rate the claim as correct. Claim In Kenya now with a population of about 48 million, we have one judge serving over 300,000 people Verdict correct There are 47.6 million people in Kenya, according to 2019 census data. The most recent data from the judiciary shows there were 153 judges as of June 2019. This works out to one judge for every 311,000 people. We rate this claim as correct. Claim We have one magistrate serving over 77,000 people Verdict understated The most recent data from the judiciary shows there were 546 magistrates in Kenya as of June 2019. The state of the judiciary report was released in January 2020. Using a population of 47.6 million , this works out to one magistrate for every 87,114 people. The chief justice’s figure was off by over 10,000 but it was still “over 77,000” people per magistrate. We therefore rate it as understated. Claim There is a ‘global average’ for the number of judges and magistrates to number of people Verdict unproven A calculation for a “global average” can be achieved by directly comparing the number of judges and magistrates to the world population. But to account for population differences, rates (per 100,000 people) are widely used . ( Note: See box below for more context. ) The chief justice has in the past spoken of a “recommended global percentage” of funding for the judiciary. We have contacted the judiciary for the source of the "global average" cited by the chief justice and will update this report with their response. Wachira Maina is a constitutional lawyer in Kenya who has written about the progress of institutions, including the judiciary, following the adoption of the 2010 constitution. He directed us to the UN Office of Drug and Crime (UNODC) for data on the administration of justice professionals against a country’s population. It shows there were 1.3 judges or magistrates for every 100,000 people in Kenya in 2014, 3.6 for South Africa in 2015, and 0.8 for the US and 8.7 for China in 2017. But the UNODC noted key weaknesses in the data when comparing countries. “The numbers reported are not restricted to judges deciding criminal cases,” it said. “The comparability problem might get even worse because some countries might still only report the number of judges whose duty is the judgment of criminal cases. “Apart from this, it is not clear whether really all judges are included in the reported figures in all countries.” Without a source for the chief justice’s claim of a global average, we can only rate this final claim as unproven. Is calculating the ratio of judges and magistrates to the population useful? The ratio of judges and magistrates to the population is useful depending on what you’re using it to show, Wachira Maina , a constitutional lawyer in Kenya told Africa Check. He gave an example of using the ratio of the number of doctors to the population as a metric for access to health, and of police officers to measure access to security services. However, he said, ratio data leaves a lot unstated, such as the distribution by region and by urban and rural areas. Therefore “to determine access to services, you will almost certainly need additional information”. “A high ratio by itself does not prove that most people have access to services, merely that if services were equitably distributed, and they rarely are, more people would have access,” Maina said. “Keep in mind though that you cannot increase access unless you have the numbers, so the ratio does still say something useful.” Chris Kerkering is a litigation manager at Katiba Institute , an organisation in Nairobi that promotes the knowledge of Kenya’s constitution. He told Africa Check that population does not automatically equate to a judge’s caseload. A very litigious society would have more cases per population, he said. Caseload and caseload weighting, which Kerkering described as not only counting the number of cases but also being able to determine how much time each respective case would take , may be the best way to determine whether a judiciary has the appropriate number of judges. But since doing a comparison between different countries with different legal systems and different cultures would be near impossible, “judges per population is a decent aggregate”, Kerkering said. He said the chief justice’s focus was on access to justice. “If there are not enough judges and the staff that support them then they are unable to provide the services that the judiciary requires. Case backlogs become one of the more obvious problems. Fewer judges mean that each judge is taking more cases.” “The more cases a judge has, the more time it takes to get through them. Access to justice requires timely decisions. The phrase ‘justice delayed is justice denied,’ is so commonly used for a reason. Often, as a case winds its way through the court system, avoidable delays result in long term harm.” “A judiciary that can’t get through its caseload promptly can’t ensure access to justice as required by the constitution.” Carlos Mureithi is a journalist based in Nairobi, Kenya Further reading: https://africacheck.org/reports/budget-cuts-hit-kenyas-judiciary-but-theres-no-global-funding-target/ Republish our content for free We believe that everyone needs the facts. You can republish the text of this article free of charge, both online and in print. However, we ask that you pay attention to these simple guidelines . In a nutshell: 1. Do not include images, as in most cases we do not own the copyright. 2. Please do not edit the article. 3. Make sure you credit "Africa Check" in the byline and don't forget to mention that the article was originally published on africacheck.org . Name Surname Email Leave this field blank Carlos Mureithi Claim Six claims about the Kenyan judiciary, from its budget and number of cases to how many judges and magistrates serve Kenya’s population. Verdict Four correct, one understated and one unproven Source Kenya’s chief justice, David Maraga (August 2020) Join us on WhatsApp Further Reading false Nigeria Trump USAid funding No, Trump cut USAid funding to Nigeria – and elsewhere – because of US interests, not because of corrupt Nigerian politicians false South Africa HIV HIV/AIDS United States funding government false claim No, 100% of South Africa’s HIV/Aids funding does not come from the United States – mostly funded by the South African government Nigeria budget debt policing Osita Chidoka aviation minister Fact-checking former minister Osita Chidoka's claims on Nigeria's 2025 budget, debt and policing Add new comment Your name Comment About text formats Restricted HTML Allowed HTML tags: <a href hreflang> <em> <strong> <cite> <blockquote cite> <code> <ul type> <ol start type> <li> <dl> <dt> <dd> <h2 id> <h3 id> <h4 id> <h5 id> <h6 id> Lines and paragraphs break automatically. Web page addresses and email addresses turn into links automatically. limit: 600 characters Leave this field blank Sign up to our newsletter Name Africa Check values your trust and is committed to the responsible management, use and protection of personal information. See our privacy policy. Leave this field blank Spot Checks View All false Nigeria Trump USAid funding No, Trump cut USAid funding to Nigeria – and elsewhere – because of US interests, not because of corrupt Nigerian politicians false South Africa HIV HIV/AIDS United States funding government false claim No, 100% of South Africa’s HIV/Aids funding does not come from the United States – mostly funded by the South African government Nigeria budget debt policing Osita Chidoka aviation minister Fact-checking former minister Osita Chidoka's claims on Nigeria's 2025 budget, debt and policing We hold public figures accountable For democracy to function, public figures need to be held to account for what they say. The claims they make need to be checked, openly and impartially. Africa Check is an independent, non-partisan organisation which assesses claims made in the public arena using journalistic skills and evidence drawn from the latest online tools, readers, public sources and experts, sorting fact from fiction and publishing the results. Browse by category Health Covid-19 Education Crime Economy Kenya Nigeria Senegal South Africa Sign up to our newsletter Name Africa Check values your trust and is committed to the responsible management, use and protection of personal information. See our privacy policy. Leave this field blank Follow us Facebook Twitter Instagram TikTok Footer About Partner With Us Terms and Conditions Contact Us Sitemap Want to keep reading our fact-checks? We will never charge you for verified, reliable information. Help us keep it that way by supporting our work. Become a newsletter subscriber Name Africa Check values your trust and is committed to the responsible management, use and protection of personal information. See our privacy policy. Leave this field blank Support independent fact-checking in Africa. See our donation optionsMore Americans are crossing Biden's $400,000 tax-hike threshold Looking for a pro?🔎 What to know 📋 How to talk money 🤑 💸 to your 📩 U.S. Politics Sports Entertainment Life Money Travel Opinion Crossword ONLY AT USA TODAY: Newsletters For Subscribers From the Archives Crossword eNewspaper Magazines Investigations Podcasts Video Humankind WITNESS (True Crime) Just Curious Best-selling Booklist Legals OUR PORTFOLIO: 10BEST USAT Savings Shopping Blueprint WITNESS (True Crime) Southern Kitchen Home Internet MONEY Taxes Add Topic A strong economy means more Americans are earning $400K. What's it mean for their taxes? Daniel de Visé USA TODAY During the 2020 presidential campaign, candidate Joe Biden presented voters with a bold pledge: He wouldn’t raise taxes on anyone earning less than $400,000 . President Biden has carried the same promise, and the same round sum, into his reelection campaign in 2024. If your income falls short of $400,000, you’re immune to tax hikes . If you earn more than that, your taxes may go up, and you just might be audited by the IRS . But a lot more people make $400,000 now than in 2020. Between 2019 and 2023, the number of American households earning more than $400,000 swelled by nearly half, from 2.6 million to an estimated 3.8 million out of roughly 131 million households. The figures come from census data compiled by the Economic Innovation Group , a public policy think tank based in Washington, D.C. Earnings are up for most Americans, both because of a strong economy and in response to rising consumer prices. Average hourly wages rose by more than one-fifth between January 2020 and April 2024, from $28.44 to $34.75, federal data show. Need a break? Play the USA TODAY Daily Crossword Puzzle. $400,000 doesn't have the same buying power in 2024 And $400,000 doesn’t have the same buying power. If you adjust the figure for inflation , a $400,000 salary in January 2020 would be worth about $486,000 now. “Back then, $400,000 was a more notable number,” said Jonathan Swanburg , a certified financial planner in Houston. Perhaps it is too much to ask a candidate to apply a cost-of-living adjustment to a pithy campaign pledge. If Biden hit the trail in 2024 promising not to raise taxes on anyone earning less than $486,000, voters might react with puzzlement. And therein, some economists say, lies one of several problems with invoking an arbitrary figure when setting fiscal policy. “I think it’s kind of a ridiculous line to draw in the first place,” said Michael Strain , director of economic policy studies at the American Enterprise Institute, another Washington think tank. “The threshold is not indexed to inflation, and it’s not indexed to average growth,” Strain said. “So, over time, more and more households are going to get hit by it.” Tax prep: 6 ways to file your taxes for free Biden administration officials say the $400,000 pledge was meant to signal his commitment not to raise taxes on anyone but the rich and his quest to ensure that the very rich don’t cheat on their taxes. “President Biden’s pledge not to raise taxes on anyone making less than $400,000 is a clear, direct and easy-to-understand commitment to the American people that, as long as he is president, he will not raise taxes on the middle class by one penny," said Jeremy M. Edwards, a White House spokesperson, adding that the president "will instead fight for a tax system that finally asks the wealthiest Americans and largest corporations to pay their fair share” Even now, over 95% of Americans earn less than $400,000 Biden officials note that, even now, well over 95% of American households earn less than $400,000. The $400,000 pledge sits well with advocates for progressive taxation, the principle of raising the tax rate for higher earners. “If you’re making $400,000, you’re wealthier than 97% of Americans, and your median net worth is $6.4 million,” said David Kass, executive director of the nonprofit Americans for Tax Fairness . “Obviously, these are folks who are doing well.” Republicans and Democrats alike are campaigning on protecting Americans from tax hikes. Republicans want to extend tax cuts enacted across the board by President Donald Trump in 2017. Democrats say they would protect all but the very wealthy. Both parties frustrate some economists, who say the government desperately needs new tax revenue to plug a yawning federal deficit, $1.7 trillion in 2023. “There’s this kind of myth out there that there’s disagreement between the parties over tax increases,” Strain said. “The reality is that one party, the Republicans, don’t want to raise taxes on anybody, and the other party, the Democrats, don’t want to raise taxes on 98% of the people, and that’s just a terrible situation to be in.” The Economic Innovation Group charted the growing ranks of Americans who earn $400,000 for The Wall Street Journal, which published the data in a story that asked whether the campaign pledge might ultimately backfire. That report focused on data from 2022. For this report, the think tank updated some of its figures through 2023. Many $400,000 households live in blue states According to the group’s research, two-thirds of the households that earned more than $400,000 in 2022 live in states Biden carried in 2020. These four states and the District of Columbia had the most families earning more than $400,000 in 2022: District of Columbia (6.1% of households earning at least $400,000) California (4.4%) Massachusetts (4.2%) New Jersey (4.1%) Connecticut (4%) The state with the fewest families above the $400,000 line, 0.8%, was Mississippi. Who earns $400,000 a year, anyway? A growing number of lucrative professions now pay $200,000 or even $300,000 a year, on average, based on federal data for 2023 . A few jobs pay $400,000. Among the top earners: Pediatric surgeons ($449,320 in average annual salary) Cardiologists ($423,250) Radiologists ($353,960) Chief executives ($258,900) Psychiatrists ($256,930) Airline pilots ($250,050) The president’s $400,000 pledge, simple as it sounds, gets complicated when it comes to policy decisions. Does it mean possible tax increases for a couple who earn $400,000 together, or only for an individual who earns that much alone? And is it gross income, or taxable income? Biden’s most recent budget raises the top income tax rate from 37% to 39.6% for single filers who make more than $400,000 in taxable income. For married couples, however, the bar rises to $450,000. More: The IRS is sending 125,000 compliance letters in campaign against wealthy tax cheats How does the $400,000 income threshold work with audits? And what about audits? Biden has pledged to raise billions of dollars in new revenue by going after wealthy tax cheats , again pledging not to target anyone earning less than $400,000. But does that cutoff for audits apply only to individual earners with $400,000 income, or to entire households? On that point, Biden’s pledge was “a little vague,” said one senior IRS official, who spoke on condition of anonymity because he was not allowed to be quoted for attribution. Either way, the official said, a household with income of $400,000 or even $500,000 does not face a much higher risk of audit now than in years past. The most recent audit data, for tax year 2021, show an overall audit rate of 0.2%, or roughly one audit for every 500 returns from individual taxpayers. For returns that showed income of $500,000 to $1 million, the audit rate rose to 0.3%: one audit for every 333 returns. Daniel de Visé covers personal finance for USA TODAY Featured Weekly Ad About Us Newsroom Staff Ethical Principles USA TODAY Network Style Guide Responsible Disclosure Request a Correction Press Releases Accessibility Sitemap Subscription Terms & Conditions Advertiser Acceptance Policy Terms of Service Privacy Policy California Notice at Collection Your Privacy Choices Contact Us Help Center Manage Account Give Feedback Get Home Delivery eNewspaper USA TODAY Shop USA TODAY Print Editions Licensing & Reprints Advertise With Us Careers Internships Support Local Business News Tips Submitting letters to the editor Podcasts Newsletters Mobile Apps Facebook X Instagram LinkedIn Threads YouTube Reddit Flipboard 10BEST USAT Savings Shopping Best-selling Booklist Southern Kitchen Jobs Sports Betting Sports Weekly Studio Gannett Classifieds Home Internet Blueprint WITNESS (True Crime) © 2025 USA TODAY, a division of Gannett Satellite Information Network, LLC.More Americans are crossing Biden's $400,000 tax-hike threshold Looking for a pro?🔎 What to know 📋 How to talk money 🤑 💸 to your 📩 U.S. Politics Sports Entertainment Life Money Travel Opinion Crossword ONLY AT USA TODAY: Newsletters For Subscribers From the Archives Crossword eNewspaper Magazines Investigations Podcasts Video Humankind WITNESS (True Crime) Just Curious Best-selling Booklist Legals OUR PORTFOLIO: 10BEST USAT Savings Shopping Blueprint WITNESS (True Crime) Southern Kitchen Home Internet MONEY Taxes Add Topic A strong economy means more Americans are earning $400K. What's it mean for their taxes? Daniel de Visé USA TODAY During the 2020 presidential campaign, candidate Joe Biden presented voters with a bold pledge: He wouldn’t raise taxes on anyone earning less than $400,000 . President Biden has carried the same promise, and the same round sum, into his reelection campaign in 2024. If your income falls short of $400,000, you’re immune to tax hikes . If you earn more than that, your taxes may go up, and you just might be audited by the IRS . But a lot more people make $400,000 now than in 2020. Between 2019 and 2023, the number of American households earning more than $400,000 swelled by nearly half, from 2.6 million to an estimated 3.8 million out of roughly 131 million households. The figures come from census data compiled by the Economic Innovation Group , a public policy think tank based in Washington, D.C. Earnings are up for most Americans, both because of a strong economy and in response to rising consumer prices. Average hourly wages rose by more than one-fifth between January 2020 and April 2024, from $28.44 to $34.75, federal data show. Need a break? Play the USA TODAY Daily Crossword Puzzle. $400,000 doesn't have the same buying power in 2024 And $400,000 doesn’t have the same buying power. If you adjust the figure for inflation , a $400,000 salary in January 2020 would be worth about $486,000 now. “Back then, $400,000 was a more notable number,” said Jonathan Swanburg , a certified financial planner in Houston. Perhaps it is too much to ask a candidate to apply a cost-of-living adjustment to a pithy campaign pledge. If Biden hit the trail in 2024 promising not to raise taxes on anyone earning less than $486,000, voters might react with puzzlement. And therein, some economists say, lies one of several problems with invoking an arbitrary figure when setting fiscal policy. “I think it’s kind of a ridiculous line to draw in the first place,” said Michael Strain , director of economic policy studies at the American Enterprise Institute, another Washington think tank. “The threshold is not indexed to inflation, and it’s not indexed to average growth,” Strain said. “So, over time, more and more households are going to get hit by it.” Tax prep: 6 ways to file your taxes for free Biden administration officials say the $400,000 pledge was meant to signal his commitment not to raise taxes on anyone but the rich and his quest to ensure that the very rich don’t cheat on their taxes. “President Biden’s pledge not to raise taxes on anyone making less than $400,000 is a clear, direct and easy-to-understand commitment to the American people that, as long as he is president, he will not raise taxes on the middle class by one penny," said Jeremy M. Edwards, a White House spokesperson, adding that the president "will instead fight for a tax system that finally asks the wealthiest Americans and largest corporations to pay their fair share” Even now, over 95% of Americans earn less than $400,000 Biden officials note that, even now, well over 95% of American households earn less than $400,000. The $400,000 pledge sits well with advocates for progressive taxation, the principle of raising the tax rate for higher earners. “If you’re making $400,000, you’re wealthier than 97% of Americans, and your median net worth is $6.4 million,” said David Kass, executive director of the nonprofit Americans for Tax Fairness . “Obviously, these are folks who are doing well.” Republicans and Democrats alike are campaigning on protecting Americans from tax hikes. Republicans want to extend tax cuts enacted across the board by President Donald Trump in 2017. Democrats say they would protect all but the very wealthy. Both parties frustrate some economists, who say the government desperately needs new tax revenue to plug a yawning federal deficit, $1.7 trillion in 2023. “There’s this kind of myth out there that there’s disagreement between the parties over tax increases,” Strain said. “The reality is that one party, the Republicans, don’t want to raise taxes on anybody, and the other party, the Democrats, don’t want to raise taxes on 98% of the people, and that’s just a terrible situation to be in.” The Economic Innovation Group charted the growing ranks of Americans who earn $400,000 for The Wall Street Journal, which published the data in a story that asked whether the campaign pledge might ultimately backfire. That report focused on data from 2022. For this report, the think tank updated some of its figures through 2023. Many $400,000 households live in blue states According to the group’s research, two-thirds of the households that earned more than $400,000 in 2022 live in states Biden carried in 2020. These four states and the District of Columbia had the most families earning more than $400,000 in 2022: District of Columbia (6.1% of households earning at least $400,000) California (4.4%) Massachusetts (4.2%) New Jersey (4.1%) Connecticut (4%) The state with the fewest families above the $400,000 line, 0.8%, was Mississippi. Who earns $400,000 a year, anyway? A growing number of lucrative professions now pay $200,000 or even $300,000 a year, on average, based on federal data for 2023 . A few jobs pay $400,000. Among the top earners: Pediatric surgeons ($449,320 in average annual salary) Cardiologists ($423,250) Radiologists ($353,960) Chief executives ($258,900) Psychiatrists ($256,930) Airline pilots ($250,050) The president’s $400,000 pledge, simple as it sounds, gets complicated when it comes to policy decisions. Does it mean possible tax increases for a couple who earn $400,000 together, or only for an individual who earns that much alone? And is it gross income, or taxable income? Biden’s most recent budget raises the top income tax rate from 37% to 39.6% for single filers who make more than $400,000 in taxable income. For married couples, however, the bar rises to $450,000. More: The IRS is sending 125,000 compliance letters in campaign against wealthy tax cheats How does the $400,000 income threshold work with audits? And what about audits? Biden has pledged to raise billions of dollars in new revenue by going after wealthy tax cheats , again pledging not to target anyone earning less than $400,000. But does that cutoff for audits apply only to individual earners with $400,000 income, or to entire households? On that point, Biden’s pledge was “a little vague,” said one senior IRS official, who spoke on condition of anonymity because he was not allowed to be quoted for attribution. Either way, the official said, a household with income of $400,000 or even $500,000 does not face a much higher risk of audit now than in years past. The most recent audit data, for tax year 2021, show an overall audit rate of 0.2%, or roughly one audit for every 500 returns from individual taxpayers. For returns that showed income of $500,000 to $1 million, the audit rate rose to 0.3%: one audit for every 333 returns. Daniel de Visé covers personal finance for USA TODAY Featured Weekly Ad About Us Newsroom Staff Ethical Principles USA TODAY Network Style Guide Responsible Disclosure Request a Correction Press Releases Accessibility Sitemap Subscription Terms & Conditions Advertiser Acceptance Policy Terms of Service Privacy Policy California Notice at Collection Your Privacy Choices Contact Us Help Center Manage Account Give Feedback Get Home Delivery eNewspaper USA TODAY Shop USA TODAY Print Editions Licensing & Reprints Advertise With Us Careers Internships Support Local Business News Tips Submitting letters to the editor Podcasts Newsletters Mobile Apps Facebook X Instagram LinkedIn Threads YouTube Reddit Flipboard 10BEST USAT Savings Shopping Best-selling Booklist Southern Kitchen Jobs Sports Betting Sports Weekly Studio Gannett Classifieds Home Internet Blueprint WITNESS (True Crime) © 2025 USA TODAY, a division of Gannett Satellite Information Network, LLC.More Americans are crossing Biden's $400,000 tax-hike threshold Looking for a pro?🔎 What to know 📋 How to talk money 🤑 💸 to your 📩 U.S. Politics Sports Entertainment Life Money Travel Opinion Crossword ONLY AT USA TODAY: Newsletters For Subscribers From the Archives Crossword eNewspaper Magazines Investigations Podcasts Video Humankind WITNESS (True Crime) Just Curious Best-selling Booklist Legals OUR PORTFOLIO: 10BEST USAT Savings Shopping Blueprint WITNESS (True Crime) Southern Kitchen Home Internet MONEY Taxes Add Topic A strong economy means more Americans are earning $400K. What's it mean for their taxes? Daniel de Visé USA TODAY During the 2020 presidential campaign, candidate Joe Biden presented voters with a bold pledge: He wouldn’t raise taxes on anyone earning less than $400,000 . President Biden has carried the same promise, and the same round sum, into his reelection campaign in 2024. If your income falls short of $400,000, you’re immune to tax hikes . If you earn more than that, your taxes may go up, and you just might be audited by the IRS . But a lot more people make $400,000 now than in 2020. Between 2019 and 2023, the number of American households earning more than $400,000 swelled by nearly half, from 2.6 million to an estimated 3.8 million out of roughly 131 million households. The figures come from census data compiled by the Economic Innovation Group , a public policy think tank based in Washington, D.C. Earnings are up for most Americans, both because of a strong economy and in response to rising consumer prices. Average hourly wages rose by more than one-fifth between January 2020 and April 2024, from $28.44 to $34.75, federal data show. Need a break? Play the USA TODAY Daily Crossword Puzzle. $400,000 doesn't have the same buying power in 2024 And $400,000 doesn’t have the same buying power. If you adjust the figure for inflation , a $400,000 salary in January 2020 would be worth about $486,000 now. “Back then, $400,000 was a more notable number,” said Jonathan Swanburg , a certified financial planner in Houston. Perhaps it is too much to ask a candidate to apply a cost-of-living adjustment to a pithy campaign pledge. If Biden hit the trail in 2024 promising not to raise taxes on anyone earning less than $486,000, voters might react with puzzlement. And therein, some economists say, lies one of several problems with invoking an arbitrary figure when setting fiscal policy. “I think it’s kind of a ridiculous line to draw in the first place,” said Michael Strain , director of economic policy studies at the American Enterprise Institute, another Washington think tank. “The threshold is not indexed to inflation, and it’s not indexed to average growth,” Strain said. “So, over time, more and more households are going to get hit by it.” Tax prep: 6 ways to file your taxes for free Biden administration officials say the $400,000 pledge was meant to signal his commitment not to raise taxes on anyone but the rich and his quest to ensure that the very rich don’t cheat on their taxes. “President Biden’s pledge not to raise taxes on anyone making less than $400,000 is a clear, direct and easy-to-understand commitment to the American people that, as long as he is president, he will not raise taxes on the middle class by one penny," said Jeremy M. Edwards, a White House spokesperson, adding that the president "will instead fight for a tax system that finally asks the wealthiest Americans and largest corporations to pay their fair share” Even now, over 95% of Americans earn less than $400,000 Biden officials note that, even now, well over 95% of American households earn less than $400,000. The $400,000 pledge sits well with advocates for progressive taxation, the principle of raising the tax rate for higher earners. “If you’re making $400,000, you’re wealthier than 97% of Americans, and your median net worth is $6.4 million,” said David Kass, executive director of the nonprofit Americans for Tax Fairness . “Obviously, these are folks who are doing well.” Republicans and Democrats alike are campaigning on protecting Americans from tax hikes. Republicans want to extend tax cuts enacted across the board by President Donald Trump in 2017. Democrats say they would protect all but the very wealthy. Both parties frustrate some economists, who say the government desperately needs new tax revenue to plug a yawning federal deficit, $1.7 trillion in 2023. “There’s this kind of myth out there that there’s disagreement between the parties over tax increases,” Strain said. “The reality is that one party, the Republicans, don’t want to raise taxes on anybody, and the other party, the Democrats, don’t want to raise taxes on 98% of the people, and that’s just a terrible situation to be in.” The Economic Innovation Group charted the growing ranks of Americans who earn $400,000 for The Wall Street Journal, which published the data in a story that asked whether the campaign pledge might ultimately backfire. That report focused on data from 2022. For this report, the think tank updated some of its figures through 2023. Many $400,000 households live in blue states According to the group’s research, two-thirds of the households that earned more than $400,000 in 2022 live in states Biden carried in 2020. These four states and the District of Columbia had the most families earning more than $400,000 in 2022: District of Columbia (6.1% of households earning at least $400,000) California (4.4%) Massachusetts (4.2%) New Jersey (4.1%) Connecticut (4%) The state with the fewest families above the $400,000 line, 0.8%, was Mississippi. Who earns $400,000 a year, anyway? A growing number of lucrative professions now pay $200,000 or even $300,000 a year, on average, based on federal data for 2023 . A few jobs pay $400,000. Among the top earners: Pediatric surgeons ($449,320 in average annual salary) Cardiologists ($423,250) Radiologists ($353,960) Chief executives ($258,900) Psychiatrists ($256,930) Airline pilots ($250,050) The president’s $400,000 pledge, simple as it sounds, gets complicated when it comes to policy decisions. Does it mean possible tax increases for a couple who earn $400,000 together, or only for an individual who earns that much alone? And is it gross income, or taxable income? Biden’s most recent budget raises the top income tax rate from 37% to 39.6% for single filers who make more than $400,000 in taxable income. For married couples, however, the bar rises to $450,000. More: The IRS is sending 125,000 compliance letters in campaign against wealthy tax cheats How does the $400,000 income threshold work with audits? And what about audits? Biden has pledged to raise billions of dollars in new revenue by going after wealthy tax cheats , again pledging not to target anyone earning less than $400,000. But does that cutoff for audits apply only to individual earners with $400,000 income, or to entire households? On that point, Biden’s pledge was “a little vague,” said one senior IRS official, who spoke on condition of anonymity because he was not allowed to be quoted for attribution. Either way, the official said, a household with income of $400,000 or even $500,000 does not face a much higher risk of audit now than in years past. The most recent audit data, for tax year 2021, show an overall audit rate of 0.2%, or roughly one audit for every 500 returns from individual taxpayers. For returns that showed income of $500,000 to $1 million, the audit rate rose to 0.3%: one audit for every 333 returns. Daniel de Visé covers personal finance for USA TODAY Featured Weekly Ad About Us Newsroom Staff Ethical Principles USA TODAY Network Style Guide Responsible Disclosure Request a Correction Press Releases Accessibility Sitemap Subscription Terms & Conditions Advertiser Acceptance Policy Terms of Service Privacy Policy California Notice at Collection Your Privacy Choices Contact Us Help Center Manage Account Give Feedback Get Home Delivery eNewspaper USA TODAY Shop USA TODAY Print Editions Licensing & Reprints Advertise With Us Careers Internships Support Local Business News Tips Submitting letters to the editor Podcasts Newsletters Mobile Apps Facebook X Instagram LinkedIn Threads YouTube Reddit Flipboard 10BEST USAT Savings Shopping Best-selling Booklist Southern Kitchen Jobs Sports Betting Sports Weekly Studio Gannett Classifieds Home Internet Blueprint WITNESS (True Crime) © 2025 USA TODAY, a division of Gannett Satellite Information Network, LLC.Verifying Kenyan governors’ claims of progress - Africa Check Skip to main content English Français Main navigation Fact-checks Reports Factsheets Guides Spot Checks Blog Meta programme fact-checks Republish our work Who we are Our team Our impact How we are funded Partners Get in touch What we do Info Finder African Fact-Checking Awards Corrections Fact-checking research Training Media Literacy Educator knowledge hub How we fact-check Corrections policy Code of principles How we rate claims Get Involved Donate Submit a claim to fact-check Partner with us Join our team Fact-checking tips Quizzes Donate Back to Africa Check Verifying Kenyan governors’ claims of progress Published on 01 December 2020 Claim Seven claims ranging from health and agriculture to water access and gender equality. Verdict One correct, one mostly correct, one misleading, two incorrect and two unproven. Source Wycliffe Oparanya, chair of Kenya’s council of governors (July 2020) This article is more than 4 years old Of the seven claims we checked, Oparanya was only correct that women are represented as required by law on county elected bodies. He was nearly on the money about the percentages allocated to health. His figures about allocations to agriculture didn’t add up, however. His claims about water and sanitation cannot be proven, while an expert told us that the 10% of budgets to be allocated to agriculture recommended by the African Union should be at both local and national levels of government, and not the sole responsibility of counties. While 2020 has been an uncertain year for many, Kenyan politicians remained predictable in at least one way: playing up their achievements in office. In November 2020 president Uhuru Kenyatta delivered a delayed state of the nation address, which we fact-checked . But three months earlier the country’s governors had braved the Covid-19 pandemic to make their annual state of devolution address . Delivered by Wycliffe Oparanya , the chair of the council of governors , the speech is required by law. Oparanya made a number of key claims, seven of which we fact-checked. These ranged from health and agriculture allocations to water and sanitation access. ( Note: Oparanya spoke on 23 July, three weeks into the new financial year. To effectively verify these claims, Africa Check waited for the office of the controller of budget ’s report on the previous financial year. This was published at the end of September. ) Claim Counties allocated an average of 7.3% of budgets to agriculture. Verdict incorrect Some of the data in the address was collected from the counties, the council’s communications office told Africa Check. They also referred us to the controller of budget’s report for the 2019/20 financial year. The report shows the 47 county governments approved a combined budget of KSh499.6 billion. We compiled data on what the counties allocated to their departments of agriculture. This was KSh34.4 billion, or 6.9% of their total budget. We therefore rate this claim as incorrect. Experts have also previously told us that actual spending is just as significant a measure to track. – Dancan Bwire Claim [The allocation to agriculture] is an increase of 0.6% from what was reported last year. Verdict incorrect In the 2019 state of devolution address , Oparanya gave the allocation to agriculture as 6.7%. We rated this claim as mostly correct as the average allocation was close enough, at 6.9%. A jump from 6.7% to 7.3% though is an increase of 0.6 percentage points or 8.9%. We therefore rate this as incorrect. ( Read our guide on how to avoid common statistical errors. ) – Alphonce Shiundu Claim [The counties are striving] to reach the 10% [allocation to agriculture] recommended by the Malabo declaration. Verdict misleading In 2014 the African Union met in Malabo, Equatorial Guinea’s capital city. The resulting Malabo declaration resolved to end hunger on the continent by 2025, and to ensure that “at least 10% of public expenditure” goes to agriculture. Dr Timothy Njagi is a research fellow at the Tegemeo Institute of Agriculture Policy and Development , an agriculture policy thinktank in Kenya. He has co-authored a policy brief urging county governments to invest more in agriculture and increase household incomes. The “correct computation” of the 10% target in the Malabo declaration “should be for the country”, he told Africa Check. This means total allocation and spending at both the national government and county government level. Njagi highlighted a 2017 report by the country’s planning department that showed what he called a “disturbing trend” where the majority of agriculture spending was concentrated at the national level. “For instance, between 2013 and 2017, 60% of the resources in agriculture were spent at the national level despite the majority of the functions being devolved,” he said. The report notes that counties consider their allocations and expenditure to agriculture to include aspects of cooperatives and trade, yet these do not constitute the sector as defined at the national level. In short, counties alone should not be chasing the 10% spending target. Therefore, we rate Oparanya’s claim as misleading. Njagi added that beyond allocation the money should be channelled to the “right uses”. He gave some of these as research, extension services and markets. -Alphonce Shiundu Claim Counties have over the past year sustained an average allocation of 24% of their total budgets to the health sector. Verdict mostly-correct In the 2019/20 financial year, Kenya’s counties allocated a combined KSh128.9 billion to health in their budgets. This is according to the controller of budget’s most recent report . As a share of their combined KSh499.6 billion budget, this works out to 25.8%. In 2019, Africa Check established the share of that year’s budget was 26%. Oparanya therefore understated his figure, but we rate the claim mostly correct. However, breaking down the data reveals some regional differences. Some 13 counties allocated less than 24% of their budgets to health. Taita Taveta had the lowest at 7%, while the highest was Kirinyaga at 40%. – Grace Gichuhi Claim Water coverage now stands at 63% from 57%. Verdict unproven Water coverage is the “population with access to water services, either with direct service connection or within reach of a public water point, as a percentage of the total population under utility’s nominal responsibility”. This definition is by the World Bank-funded International Benchmarking Network , a project that seeks to “support access to comparative information ... among water supply and sanitation providers worldwide”. In Kenya, water coverage is tracked by the Water Services Regulatory Board . It’s most recent report , published in 2020, covers the 2018/19 financial year. The data shows that water coverage improved from 57% in 2017/18 to 59% in 2018/19. In the absence of data for 2019/20, we rate council chair Oparanya’s claim unproven. The report also notes that water service providers serve barely half, or 49%, of the national population. “The trend in coverage has been growing, albeit slowly, with a growth of only four percentage points in the last five years,” it says. – Alphonce Shiundu Claim Sanitation coverage is now at 25%, from 16%. Verdict unproven The Water Services Regulatory Board defines “sewered sanitation coverage” as “the number of people served with flush or pour-flush to piped sewer systems, as a percentage of the total population within the service area of the utility”. Utilities with sewerage systems are measured on how they deliver sanitation services to their consumers. The board’s most recent report , published in 2020, covers the 2018/19 financial year. It shows that sanitation coverage increased slightly from 16% in 2017/18 to 17% in 2018/19. We however rate this claim as unproven as we do not have the board’s 2019/20 report that the governors referred to. The report does note there has been a decline in coverage as the population rose rapidly, outpacing investment in infrastructure. Only about 3.9 million people in 26 counties have access to sewered sanitation, it adds, with 61% of these people in the capital Nairobi. “This therefore implies that 21 counties lack any systems for waste management.” – Alphonce Shiundu Claim County governments have continued to adhere to the two-thirds gender principle. Three counties of Kilifi, Nyeri and Migori have gone higher and have a 50/50 representation of male and female CECs. Verdict correct “CECs” refer to county executive committee members who form the county cabinet. Kenya’s constitution prescribes that “not more than two-thirds of the members of elective or appointive bodies shall be of the same gender”. According to the most recent economic survey from the national statistics office, all 47 county assemblies have met this threshold since the last election in 2017. The survey’s data is sourced from the council of governors. For county executives, at least 30% of the county cabinets in 39 counties were female. The three counties cited by Oparanya, in addition to Mombasa, had achieved gender parity. Some counties that failed to achieve this included Kitui, which had no woman county executive in 2019, Nairobi and Kisumu (both 25%) and Kericho (16.7%). – Alphonce Shiundu Republish our content for free We believe that everyone needs the facts. You can republish the text of this article free of charge, both online and in print. However, we ask that you pay attention to these simple guidelines . In a nutshell: 1. Do not include images, as in most cases we do not own the copyright. 2. Please do not edit the article. 3. Make sure you credit "Africa Check" in the byline and don't forget to mention that the article was originally published on africacheck.org . Name Surname Email Leave this field blank Africa Check Claim Seven claims ranging from health and agriculture to water access and gender equality. Verdict One correct, one mostly correct, one misleading, two incorrect and two unproven. Source Wycliffe Oparanya, chair of Kenya’s council of governors (July 2020) Join us on WhatsApp Further Reading false South Africa HIV HIV/AIDS false cure Health red jatropha leaves false claim No, red jatropha leaves are not a cure for HIV Kenya William Ruto scorecard Health health plan medical college graduates #RutoRecordReport Kenya’s president Ruto inflates wins on controversial health plan sign-ups false South Africa Ginger lemon diabetes false cure Health This ginger and lemon concoction doesn’t change anything – diabetes is still incurable Add new comment Your name Comment About text formats Restricted HTML Allowed HTML tags: <a href hreflang> <em> <strong> <cite> <blockquote cite> <code> <ul type> <ol start type> <li> <dl> <dt> <dd> <h2 id> <h3 id> <h4 id> <h5 id> <h6 id> Lines and paragraphs break automatically. Web page addresses and email addresses turn into links automatically. limit: 600 characters Leave this field blank Sign up to our newsletter Name Africa Check values your trust and is committed to the responsible management, use and protection of personal information. See our privacy policy. Leave this field blank Spot Checks View All false South Africa HIV HIV/AIDS false cure Health red jatropha leaves false claim No, red jatropha leaves are not a cure for HIV Kenya William Ruto scorecard Health health plan medical college graduates #RutoRecordReport Kenya’s president Ruto inflates wins on controversial health plan sign-ups false South Africa Ginger lemon diabetes false cure Health This ginger and lemon concoction doesn’t change anything – diabetes is still incurable We hold public figures accountable For democracy to function, public figures need to be held to account for what they say. The claims they make need to be checked, openly and impartially. Africa Check is an independent, non-partisan organisation which assesses claims made in the public arena using journalistic skills and evidence drawn from the latest online tools, readers, public sources and experts, sorting fact from fiction and publishing the results. Browse by category Health Covid-19 Education Crime Economy Kenya Nigeria Senegal South Africa Sign up to our newsletter Name Africa Check values your trust and is committed to the responsible management, use and protection of personal information. See our privacy policy. Leave this field blank Follow us Facebook Twitter Instagram TikTok Footer About Partner With Us Terms and Conditions Contact Us Sitemap Want to keep reading our fact-checks? We will never charge you for verified, reliable information. Help us keep it that way by supporting our work. Become a newsletter subscriber Name Africa Check values your trust and is committed to the responsible management, use and protection of personal information. See our privacy policy. Leave this field blank Support independent fact-checking in Africa. See our donation optionsAfrica's agricultural revolution: From self-sufficiency to global food powerhouse | White & Case LLP Skip to main content Main navigation People Services Insights Trendscape Publications Podcast Resources Antitrust Merger StatPak (WAMS) CFIUS FIRRMA Tool 2.0 Dawn Raid Analysis Quarterly Debt Explorer M&A Explorer Non-Compete Resource Center (NCRC) US Administration Tracker About Us Our Firm Locations Responsible Business Newsroom Perspective: 2024 Careers Careers Apply Inside White & Case Alumni Breadcrumb Home Our Thinking Africa Focus: Summer 2023 Table of contents Africa Focus: Summer 2023 Home Introduction Africa's agricultural revolution: From self-sufficiency to global food powerhouse Fueling economic diversification and growth: Angolan oil & gas takes center stage Preserving Africa's biodiversity: Why global funding is vital Redefining US-Africa trade relations Don't let a crisis go to waste: Financing mining & metals projects in Africa in 2023 Print-friendly version Subscribe Africa%27s%20agricultural%20revolution%3A%20From%20self-sufficiency%20to%20global%20food%20powerhouse https://news.whitecase.com/5/38/forms/subscribe.asp mailto:?subject=Africa%27s%20agricultural%20revolution%3A%20From%20self-sufficiency%20to%20global%20food%20powerhouse&body= https://www.linkedin.com/shareArticle?mini=true&url=&title=Africa%27s%20agricultural%20revolution%3A%20From%20self-sufficiency%20to%20global%20food%20powerhouse&source=www.whitecase.com https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Africa%27s%20agricultural%20revolution%3A%20From%20self-sufficiency%20to%20global%20food%20powerhouse&url=&via=WhiteCase https://www.facebook.com/share.php?u=&t=Africa%27s%20agricultural%20revolution%3A%20From%20self-sufficiency%20to%20global%20food%20powerhouse https://news.whitecase.com/5/38/forms/subscribe.asp Our thinking Africa Focus: Summer 2023 What's inside Delivering growth through sustainable development Growth through sustainable development Mukund Dhar Partner | London Services Infrastructure, Transportation & Logistics , Mining & Metals , Energy , Power , Project Development and Finance , Financial Institutions Partner, White & Case LLP Recent disruptions in the global food supply chains have highlighted Africa's urgent need to become self-sufficient in food production. Traditionally, the continent has turned to small-scale community-based agricultural projects as a means to meet its food needs. But feeding a population of more than 1.2 billion people requires more than communal farming; it calls for a paradigm shift toward agriculture on an industrial scale. Our milestone tenth edition of Africa Focus opens with an article exploring obstacles to large-scale farming in Africa and how they may be overcome to secure funding required for such agricultural megaprojects. While Angola has entered an ambitious plan to diversify its economy, it remains heavily dependent on its oil & gas industry. Hydrocarbon revenues are crucial for funding Angola's commitments under the Paris Agreement, but also for diversifying the country's economy and improving the livelihoods of its citizens. Our second article looks at the latest developments in Angola's oil & gas sector, including increased M&A activity and a three-well offshore exploration project at a depth of 3,628 meters (11,903 feet) below mean sea level—a new world record water depth set in 2021. Africa is home to many of the world's most biodiverse regions, including eight of the 36 recognized global biodiversity hotspots. The Congo rainforests have also overtaken the Amazon as the most significant carbon sink on Earth. Our third article highlights the scale of the challenge of biodiversity protection in Africa and options to fund it. Trade ties between Africa and the United States are seeing something of a revival as the US seeks to revitalize its economic engagement on the continent. The US African Growth and Opportunity Act (AGOA) is one such pivotal agreement that is due to go before the US Congress in 2025. Africa holds a remarkable 30 percent of the world's mineral reserves, yet it only accounted for less than 10 percent of global mining exploration spending and less than 5 percent of the sector's global revenue in 2022. Many of Africa's minerals are vital for reducing carbon emissions and transitioning to renewable energy. Developing these reserves sustainably is crucial for Africa's economies. Our final article examines how mining companies across Africa continue to find financing for the development of their projects. Africa's agricultural revolution: From self-sufficiency to global food powerhouse Read 12 min. article Fueling economic diversification and growth: Angolan oil & gas takes center stage Read 13 min. article Preserving Africa's biodiversity: Why global funding is vital Read 10 min. article Redefining US-Africa trade relations Read 9 min. article Don't let a crisis go to waste: Financing mining & metals projects in Africa in 2023 Read 7 min. article Print-friendly version Download print-friendly version Africa Focus: Summer 2023 Africa's agricultural revolution: From self-sufficiency to global food powerhouse Among its many intricately interlinked challenges, Africa faces burgeoning cities and increasing numbers of rural mouths to feed. But these challenges are not insurmountable: With agriculture at the core of the continent’s economic transformation, Africa has the potential to become a global agricultural powerhouse and a net exporter of food. Insight 12 July 2023 | 12 min read Gareth Hodder | Brenda Migwalla *Stephen Pickup, Head of Agriculture at Traditum Private Equity, co-authored this publication. US$1 trillion Africa’s food and agriculture market could increase from US$280 billion a year in 2023 to US$1 trillion by 2030 Africa has 60 percent of the world's uncultivated arable land. The agriculture sector accounts for 35 percent of Africa's GDP and employs more Africans than any other sector. So why does Africa spend a staggering US$78 billion of scarce foreign currency on food imports each year, with some countries such as Zimbabwe, Guinea and Sudan exceeding 100 percent of their annual foreign currency receipts? Why in 2020 did more than 20 percent of Africans face hunger—a figure twice as high as any other region in the world? Why is it that approximately 80 percent of the continent's food supply still comes from small-scale farmers, many still practicing subsistence agriculture? The 2030 Agenda adopted by the United Nations General Assembly on September 25, 2015, notes the need to "devote resources to developing rural areas and sustainable agriculture and fisheries…"; to "account for population trends in national, rural and urban development strategies and policies"; to "increase investment in rural infrastructure, agricultural research"; and to "support positive economic, social and environmental link between urban, peri-urban and rural areas". Agricultural aspirations for Africa are set out further by the African Union (AU) "Agenda 2063: The Africa We Want," which calls for accelerated agricultural growth and transformation, leading to shared prosperity and improved livelihoods. Although such global and pan-African statements of intent are crucial, they must be followed by concrete national regulations and policies if African agriculture is to attract the scale of investment required to become a net exporter of food. With agriculture at the core of Africa’s economic transformation, the continent has the potential to become a global agricultural powerhouse and a net exporter of food Among many other intricately interlinked challenges, Africa faces burgeoning cities and increasing numbers of rural mouths to feed. Between 1990 and 2021, the rural population of sub-Saharan Africa experienced a shift in both proportion and magnitude. While the percentage of the rural population decreased from 72 percent to 58 percent over the period, the actual number of rural residents increased significantly, surging from 374.5 million to 687 million. These challenges are not insurmountable, though. Africa has the potential to be a global agricultural powerhouse and a net exporter of food, with agriculture being a core driver of the continent's economic transformation. According to the African Development Bank, Africa's food and agriculture market could increase from US$280 billion a year in 2023 to US$1 trillion by 2030. But what would it take for Africa to emerge as a prominent global agricultural force? There are six levers that, when applied collectively, can trigger the agricultural renaissance in Africa that is necessary to achieve this vision. View full image: Six key levers that collectively can ignite Africa's agricultural renaissance (PDF) Shifting legislation and policies to support wider range of agricultural projects Impact investors being involved not only encourages new investors to come in, but they have capacity to support developers to bring about design improvements that commercial financial institutions cannot An African agricultural renaissance will require a shift in national development policies from supporting a small number of mostly export-focused crops—cotton, cocoa beans and coffee—to prioritizing a wider range of agricultural products for consumption on the continent. Agricultural exports are crucial, as they generate valuable foreign currency. A significant portion of Africa's cross-border trade is between African countries, which is also vital in fostering pan-African food security. In 2018, intra-African trade accounted for 15 percent of exports and, in turn, 15 percent of that was in agricultural products. The African Continental Free Trade Area (AfCFTA), established in that same year, will—in time—no doubt significantly enhance this flow of agricultural products across African borders. Improved customs processes at border crossings will help minimize the volume of produce spoiling in transit. Moreover, processing such exported goods locally rather than exporting raw products would increase revenues and create new job opportunities. Improving access to capital for private sector The COVID-19 pandemic wreaked havoc upon Africa's fiscal health, but it has not diminished the needs of the continent's agricultural sector or the urgency for them to be effectively met. Through the Comprehensive African Agricultural Development Programme (CAADP), African Union member states committed to a minimum of 10 percent of their government expenditure toward agriculture. In 2021, however, the average government expenditure on agriculture in Africa stood at a mere 4.1 percent. Access to credit is a major impediment to private sector investment in African agriculture. According to the African Development Bank, the estimated current financing shortfall ranges between US$27 billion and US$65 billion annually. Even more direly, the Commercial Agriculture for Smallholders and Agribusiness (CASA) program—a flagship initiative of the UK Foreign, Commonwealth & Development Office—estimates the financing gap to be in excess of US$1 billion, based on the demand of US$160 billion, minus the current provision of US$54 billion by banks, impact investors and other financial intermediaries. US$78 billion Africa spends a staggering US$78 billion of scarce foreign currency on food imports each year Impact investors also play important roles. According to Philippa Viljoen of the impact investment firm InfraCo Africa, "Impact investors being involved not only encourages new investors to come in, but they have capacity to support developers to bring about design improvements that commercial financial institutions cannot. This can make the difference between a project being bankable, or not." The CASA report proposes four long-term strategies to bridge the funding gap: (i) grow more small agribusinesses into commercially viable projects to anchor local bank financing; (ii) develop capacity, incentives and infrastructure for local banks and funds to profitably support smaller, less commercial agribusinesses; (iii) enhance the effectiveness of blended finance instruments; and (iv) build infrastructure around climate finance. These strategies are enormous both in scope and in scale. Transforming them into tangible reality will depend heavily on coordinated action from stakeholders within the agricultural finance ecosystem. Small-scale agricultural operations have very direct links to community upliftment. With the appropriate institutional and advisory support and compelling business cases, such projects offer viable opportunities for sustainable finance instruments such as social bonds and loans, blended finance and impact investing, and can become attractive investment options for institutional investors. Within Africa's agriculture and food & beverage sectors, there are currently 56 companies with annual revenues above US$500 million, of which 14 companies have turnovers in excess of US$1 billion. Such larger-scale agro-industrial enterprises are better placed to attract their own capital, and their future seems bright. Some of the world's largest agriculture companies—including the three biggest players, Cargill, ADM and Bayer—also have significant operations in Africa. View full image: Africa’s largest indigenous companies with US$500+ million annual revenues in agriculture & food chain (PDF) Addressing the infrastructure gap 4.1% In 2021, the average government expenditure on agriculture in Africa stood at a mere 4.1 percent The infrastructure gap in Africa is well documented, and it impacts agriculture as significantly as it does other sectors. The reliance on outdated, poorly maintained—or even nonexistent—infrastructure inhibits productivity at least as much as other institutional challenges, such as weak governance, onerous regulation and lack of access to finance. Poor road, rail and harbor infrastructure hinders farmers from being able to get their goods to market, and add as much as 30 to 40 percent to the costs of goods traded among African countries. While investment in African infrastructure projects has seen a general increase in recent decades, the reality remains that fewer than 10 percent of infrastructure projects in Africa reach financial close, with 80 percent failing at the feasibility and business plan stage. Lack of clarity about the commercial viability, political and currency risk, counterparty and regulatory risk, and lack of exit opportunities are all factors in such a high rate of failure. Involvement of credible development finance institutions provides assurance that due diligence has been rigorous and the overall approach prudent, which enhances the probability of closure, and proper risk mitigation instruments help improve the credit rating of the borrower, hence the cost of finance. View full image: Modern commercial agriculture, at scale in Africa, will require enhancement of all aspects of the value c (PDF) Resolving supply chain issues 30-40% Additional cost to goods traded between African countries because of poor road, rail and harbor infrastructure Supply chain costs and related issues are a major obstacle to the renaissance of African agriculture. Making food supply chains more efficient and profitable requires reliable and efficient delivery of upstream goods and services, as well as downstream delivery of the goods to market. One notable example is Releaf, a Lagos-based company that uses cutting-edge technologies, including geospatial mapping, to identify optimal locations for supply chain infrastructure and to bring processing capacity directly to palm nut farmers in Nigeria, eliminating the need for these farmers to rely on large factories, located too far away to be affordably reached. Rent-seeking by third parties—which can sometimes extend to corruption—can increase the costs of doing business, both upstream and downstream, and discourage investment into African agriculture projects. While regulatory reform and institutional enhancement will help reduce such practices, some large-scale farming enterprises have resorted to resolving this challenge through vertical integration of upstream and downstream supply chain components into their own businesses, rather than relying on external parties. The emergence of large-scale supermarket chains working directly with their suppliers to improve supply chain efficiencies is also helping to alleviate some of the downstream challenges. Improving productivity of small-scale farmers US$ 1,526 The agricultural value added per farmworker in sub-Saharan Africa was a mere US$1,526 in 2019, in stark contrast with that of a US farmworker, which exceeded US$100,000 Small-scale farmers will remain crucial to African agriculture for years to come, but they are facing significant pressures. Both small- and medium-scale farming enterprises are focusing almost exclusively on markets immediately local to them. These farmers need better access to irrigation and technology to improve their productivity and farming practices. Small-scale farmers also need support in storing and transporting their produce to market. Centralized entities that are properly managed—rather than individual farmers themselves—would be far better positioned to attract funding and deliver results. View full image: Agriculture value added per worker 1991 to 2019, projected to current (PDF) Adapting to climate change 30 million tons of cereals have been displaced in Africa due to the situation in Ukraine Adapting Africa's food systems to climate change is an imperative, not a choice. If global temperatures rise by 2° to 3° Celsius above pre-industrial levels, as current trends suggest, disruption to African food security will be profound—potentially catastrophic—for those already struggling with hunger. Even on the 1.5° Celsius trajectory proposed by the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) as a maximum, more ambitious and innovative adaptation interventions are needed to avoid widespread famine and forced migration in coming decades. Research and planning are required to assess how Africa's food security is to be achieved amid diminished agricultural potential, particularly in the face of water scarcity. From self-sufficiency to global food powerhouse Russia's invasion of Ukraine has had a devastating impact on Africa's food security, and has triggered a shortage of at least 30 million tons of food across the continent, especially wheat, maize and soybeans. Just replacing the 30 million tons of cereals that have been displaced due to the situation in Ukraine means approximately 36,000 square kilometers of farmland would be needed if Africa were to achieve the same cereal yield of 8.27 tons per hectare as in the United States. However, at Africa's current cereal yield of 1.75 tons per hectare, the required farmland would exceed a staggering 171,000 square kilometers. Improving yield is a key priority. Enabling Africa to feed itself and realize its potential of becoming a global agricultural powerhouse requires development of large-scale commercial farming using cutting-edge technologies. It also requires effective support to small-scale farmers to enhance their production and competitiveness in the market. These need not be conflicting priorities. The challenges are significant but not insurmountable. This implies mechanization on a grand scale. In 2019, the agricultural value added per farmworker in the US exceeded US$100,000. In sub-Saharan Africa, it amounted to a mere US$1,526. Over the past three decades, Africa tripled its cereal production. But its yield barely increased, with almost all the growth resulting from the expansion of cultivation areas. This stands in stark contrast to Southeast Asia, which has also significantly increased its cereal output, but the gains have been almost entirely through yield improvement. Significant improvements in productivity will also benefit Africa's biodiversity, as it will reduce the need to cultivate vast tracts of virgin land in order to meet the continent's demands. A comprehensive overhaul of both upstream and downstream supply chains will be necessary to add tens or hundreds of millions of tons of new cereal production in Africa. Infrastructure will need to be improved to the point at which seed, fertilizer, equipment and other production necessities can be transported to farms. Ideally, these agricultural necessities should be manufactured in Africa, requiring the construction of new factories with their own supply chains. Downstream, infrastructure bottlenecks must be cleared to facilitate commerce and distribution, establish new agro-processing plants and create new wholesale and retail businesses. The debt raised to finance African agricultural projects can be serviced through the reduction in expenditures currently allocated to food imports. Since demand for food is perennial, strong business cases are possible if the structural impediments to production can be overcome. Investment in agrifoodtech saw a 44 percent decline globally from 2021 to 2022. Not so in Africa, where it has grown substantially in recent years, from US$185 million in 2020 to US$482.3 million in 2021, and to US$640 million in 2022. However, this investment represents less than 1 percent of the total amount spent on imported food. View full image: Amount of long-leased (typically to foreign entities) as a percentage of all arable land (PDF) In addition to overcoming structural obstacles to production, planning needs to be pragmatic, focusing on large-scale agrifood projects, developing bankable business cases and managing investment risks to create an environment attractive to private sector investors. Governments have a crucial role to play in this by taking responsibility for the creation of a regulatory environment supportive of a substantially expanded agricultural sector in Africa. The shift toward large-scale agriculture, however, must not come at the expense of small-scale farmers, who are an integral part of Africa's agricultural landscape. There has never been a more opportune moment for a fundamental shift in Africa's agricultural sector. Africa should be able to feed itself with its locally produced food; it should also be contributing significantly to feeding the world. White & Case means the international legal practice comprising White & Case LLP, a New York State registered limited liability partnership, White & Case LLP, a limited liability partnership incorporated under English law and all other affiliated partnerships, companies and entities. This article is prepared for the general information of interested persons. It is not, and does not attempt to be, comprehensive in nature. Due to the general nature of its content, it should not be regarded as legal advice. © 2023 White & Case LLP Contacts Gareth Hodder Partner | Dubai Services Project Development and Finance , Energy , Financial Institutions Brenda Migwalla Associate | Doha Services Debt Finance Service areas Africa Business & Human Rights Sustainability & Responsible Business Project Development and Finance Subscribe Africa%27s%20agricultural%20revolution%3A%20From%20self-sufficiency%20to%20global%20food%20powerhouse https://www.whitecase.com/insight-our-thinking/africa-focus-summer-2023-africas-agricultural-revolution https://news.whitecase.com/5/38/forms/subscribe.asp mailto:?subject=Africa%27s%20agricultural%20revolution%3A%20From%20self-sufficiency%20to%20global%20food%20powerhouse&body=https://www.whitecase.com/insight-our-thinking/africa-focus-summer-2023-africas-agricultural-revolution https://www.linkedin.com/shareArticle?mini=true&url=https://www.whitecase.com/insight-our-thinking/africa-focus-summer-2023-africas-agricultural-revolution&title=Africa%27s%20agricultural%20revolution%3A%20From%20self-sufficiency%20to%20global%20food%20powerhouse&source=www.whitecase.com https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Africa%27s%20agricultural%20revolution%3A%20From%20self-sufficiency%20to%20global%20food%20powerhouse&url=https://www.whitecase.com/insight-our-thinking/africa-focus-summer-2023-africas-agricultural-revolution&via=WhiteCase https://www.facebook.com/share.php?u=https://www.whitecase.com/insight-our-thinking/africa-focus-summer-2023-africas-agricultural-revolution&t=Africa%27s%20agricultural%20revolution%3A%20From%20self-sufficiency%20to%20global%20food%20powerhouse https://news.whitecase.com/5/38/forms/subscribe.asp Top Experience People Services Insights Trendscape Publications Podcast About us Our Firm Locations Responsible Business Newsroom Awards & Rankings Perspective: 2024 2023 Global Citizenship Review Join Us Careers Apply Inside White & Case Alumni Resources Antitrust Merger StatPak (WAMS) CFIUS FIRRMA Tool 2.0 Dawn Raid Analysis Quarterly Debt Explorer M&A Explorer Non-Compete Resource Center (NCRC) US Administration Tracker Follow us Cookie Settings ©White & Case LLP 1996- 2025 Attorney Advertising. Prior results do not guarantee a similar outcome. Footer Contact Subscribe Legal Privacy Policy Modern Slavery Statement Remote Access Search Dialog × × Close Share a link to this page Email LinkedIn X FacebookAfrica has a bold plan for agriculture: now is the time to implement it Subscribe for full access Home Sectors Finance Politics Business Energy Technology Resources Arts & Culture Press Releases Opinion Dossiers Podcasts Road to COP Partner Hub App FAQ Events African Banker New African Magazine Magazine de l'Afrique APO Feed image/svg+xml Sign in Subscribe image/svg+xml Finance Politics Business Technology Energy Resources Arts & Culture Newsletters Sign in Subscribe Interest 1 Lorem, ipsum dolor sit amet consectetur adipisicing elit. Interest 2 Nisi autem molestiae quasi itaque sunt saepe optio maxime. Interest 3 iste repellendus quos necessitatibus fuga in nam placeat. Interest 4 Lorem, ipsum dolor sit amet consectetur adipisicing elit. image/svg+xml Sign in Sign in to access your account, subscription and more. Remember Me Forgot Password? or Sign in with Google Create a new account Create an account Create a new account to access your subscription. or Sign in with Google Already have an account? Africa has a bold plan for agriculture: now is the time to implement it African leaders have committed to decisive steps to address food insecurity, but implementation is essential, says Nardos Bekele-Thomas. February 10th, 2025 Opinion by Nardos Bekele-Thomas Image : TONY KARUMBA/AFP Africa’s food sector is at a crossroads. A new continental vision for building resilient and sustainable agrifood systems – the Kampala Declaration – was agreed at an African Union summit of heads of state held in Kampala, Uganda from 9 th to 11 th of January 2025. The summit endorsed a new 10-year Strategy of the Comprehensive Africa Agriculture Development Programme (CAADP) for 2026 to 2035. Through the Kampala Declaration, our African leaders committed to take decisive action to address perennial challenges that have led to food insecurity, environmental degradation, high dependence on food imports, vulnerability to climatic and socio-economic shocks, and marginalisation of key groups such as women and youths in our continent. The Declaration is an ambitious agenda to increase food output by 45%, reduce post-harvest losses by half, and raise the share of locally processed food to 35% of the agrifood sector GDP by the end of 2035. To drive this growth, our leaders in Africa have committed to mobilising a total of $100bn in public and private sector investment and financing in the next 10 years. These interventions are intended to end hunger and reduce malnutrition by 25%, boost intra-African trade, advance inclusivity and equitable livelihoods, and protect at least 40% of households from shocks in the next 10 years. The African Union Development Agency (AUDA-NEPAD) as the premier development agency for the African Union (AU), has been mandated to lead the implementation of the Kampala Declaration. This role will include supporting AU member states to domesticate this continental agenda and align it with their own national development plans and budget frameworks. Together with my team we will also support and coordinate member states and other key stakeholders in the execution of priority programmes, partnership building, resources mobilisation, knowledge exchange and monitoring and reporting of progress towards the targets. Urgent need to accelerate implementation Although this is a role that AUDA-NEPAD has been playing since the inception of the CAADP programme in 2003, the urgent need to accelerate implementation and align with the new Kampala agenda means that we will need to rapidly expand our technical and financial resources to support the execution of the CAADP Kampala agenda. Discussions with key partnerships such as knowledge partners, non-governmental Organisations, private players, farmers representatives, civil society organisations and donor agencies are already under ways to expand existing partners or to build new one required to support the new CAADP agenda. The Comprehensive Africa Agriculture Development Program (CAADP) has been a pivotal framework for transforming agriculture across Africa since its inception in 2003 with the Maputo Declaration. In 2014, the African heads of state and government reaffirmed their commitment to the CAADP agenda through the Maputo declaration, agreeing to allocate at least 10% of public expenditure to agriculture to achieve a 6% annual growth rate in agricultural gross domestic product (GDP). The 2014 Malabo CAADP Declaration reinforced these commitments and added more ambitious goals and targets to be achieved by 2025, including eradicating hunger, halving poverty, tripling intra-African agricultural trade and building resilience. CAADP has been perhaps one of AU’s most consequential and far-reaching policy framework. Adopted by nearly all AU member states, CAADP has led the development of robust agricultural transformation policies and plans. After two decades of CAADP implementation, Africa is in a remarkably better position than at the time of the Maputo declaration in 2003. The continent has made enormous progress in terms of economic and agricultural growth, improvement in poverty and nutrition outcomes, expansion of agricultural trade, and public investments in agriculture. Agricultural public investment has risen to double the levels seen in the 1990s. Increasing investment in agriculture as a driver of transformation is foremost among the objectives of CAADP. In absolute terms, public expenditure on agriculture (PAE) increased from $10.7bn in 2000 to $17bn in 2021. CAADP commitment to triple intra-continental trade in agricultural commodities has contributed to robust growth in intra-regional and global agricultural trade. Between 2003 and 2021, the value of intra-African agricultural trade increased by 175% from $5.4bn to $14.9bn. Currently around 20% of Africa’s agricultural exports are directed within the continent. Africa’s global agricultural exports also increased significantly from $25.3bn in 2003 to $73.2bn in 2021. From Malabo to the Kampala Declaration Despite significant achievements, which we thank our partners and stakeholders for, from CAADP implementation in the last 20 years, progress measured against the Malabo targets has been insufficient as revealed by the four biennial review reports presented so far – including the fourth iteration that was presented to the AU Assembly in February 2024. The heads of state and government acknowledged that the continent is not on track to meet the Malabo goals and targets by 2025, underscoring the urgency to develop a post-Malabo CAADP agenda focused on building resilient, inclusive and sustainable agrifood systems over the next CAADP decade (2026-2035). The roadmap to develop a post-Malabo agenda was launched in March 2024. The African Union Commission (AUC), through its Department of Agriculture, Rural Development, Blue Economy and Sustainable Environment (DARBE) and the African Union Development Agency (AUDA-NEPAD), in collaboration with key technical partners, initiated the process. The roadmap emphasised broad and inclusive stakeholder consultations and thematic analytical studies that involved African and international centres of excellence, state and non-state stakeholders and representatives on farmers. The new CAADP Strategy and Action Plan (2026-2035) envisions sustainable and resilient agrifood systems for a healthy and prosperous Africa. In line with Agenda 2063, the African Common Position on Food Systems and the COP28 commitments on food systems, it advocates for transformative, holistic approaches that span the entire agrifood value chain, from production to consumption. The strategy integrates economic, social and environmental dimensions to enhance food security, improve nutrition and promote agricultural sustainability, while focusing on strengthening institutional capacity, harnessing technology and diversifying economies through value-added activities and agro-industrialisation that create jobs and improve livelihoods. Guided by the principles of national ownership, inclusiveness, environmental sustainability and multi-stakeholder coordination, the plan emphasises evidence-based decision-making, mutual accountability and regional cooperation to harness synergies across the continent. Through this integrated framework, CAADP aims to accelerate the transformation of agrifood systems while ensuring equitable benefits for all stakeholders, especially women, youth and vulnerable groups. Six strategic objectives The 10-year strategy is organised into six S trategic Objective areas which outline priority intervention areas needed to drive the transformation of agrifood systems – intensifying sustainable food production, agro-industrialisation, and trade; boosting investment and financing for transformation; ensuring food and nutrition security; advancing inclusivity and equitable livelihoods; building resilient agrifood systems; and strengthening agrifood systems governance. While the Kampala Declaration is a new vision for Africa’s agrifood systems transformation, it largely builds on the lessons and achievements of the Malabo Declaration. Lessons from 20 years of CAADP implementation shape both the approach and substance of the Kampala Declaration and its 10-year Strategy. The Kampala Declaration is premised on the urgent need to accelerate implementation while ensuring continuity, coherence and consistence in the continental agrifood systems agenda. To ensure the successful implementation of the post-Malabo CAADP agenda, strengthening institutional and human capacities is essential. This includes targeted support to us at AUDA-NEPAD and other AU institutions who have been mandated with leading and coordinating the implementation of Kampala Declaration. A proposed special fund is intended to mobilise significant resources to support implementation at scale. Improving knowledge management and accountability mechanisms is equally critical. AUDA-NEPAD its partners will pursue the work to strengthen mutual accountability frameworks and enhancing reporting systems, such as the CAADP biennial review process, to enable better tracking of progress and alignment with the agenda’s objectives. These systems will ensure that data-driven insights inform policies and interventions, fostering transparency and building trust among diverse stakeholders. Follow the roadmap At AUDA-NEPAD, we have begun the process of developing a roadmap for the domestication of the Kampala Declaration. The roadmap will outline all key steps to be followed, and the main actions involved. To ensure continuity and sustained momentum, the work of engaging with member states to plan for the technical support and coordination required to drive the domestication of the Kampala Declaration at national level continues. We are pleased that some of the member states have already submitted requests to AUDA-NEPAD for support in revising and reviewing their national agricultural investment plans (NAIPs) to better align with the Kampala Agenda. Preparations are also underway to review existing mutual accountability frameworks such as the Biennial Review process in line recommendations made in the new CAADP Strategy and Action Plan (2026-2035). The year 2025 is a time for transition and acceleration as we turn the page on Malabo and open a new chapter of the Kampala CAADP agenda. Want to continue reading? Subscribe today. You've read all your free articles for this month! Subscribe now to enjoy full access to our content. Digital Monthly £8.00 / month Receive full unlimited access to our articles, opinions, podcasts and more. Digital Yearly £70.00 / year Our best value offer - save £26 and gain access to all of our digital content for an entire year! Subscribe Sign in Nardos Bekele-Thomas Nardos Bekele-Thomas is chief executive officer of the African Union Development Agency - New Partnerships for Africa's Development (AUDA-NEPAD) Keep reading Finance May 5th, 2025 New initiative aims to close Africa’s $80bn trade financing gap By David Thomas African Banker May 3rd, 2025 Shortlist of nominees announced for the African Banker Awards 2025 By African Banker Politics May 2nd, 2025 African-led diplomacy struggles to resolve DRC war By Luke Kilian Arts & Culture May 2nd, 2025 Tingatinga: the story of an East African art phenomenon By Stephen Williams InFocus Aug 30th, 2023 Biodiversity Africa has some of the world's most precious ecosystems, including vast carbon-storing rainforests of global significance. Protecting biodiversity is both a response and challenge to global warming. Find out more InFocus Aug 30th, 2023 Green Minerals InFocus Aug 30th, 2023 Energy Transition Follow us Facebook Youtube Twitter Our publications Magazine de l'Afrique New African Magazine African Banker Our services IC Events IC Intelligence IC Publications Visit us often? Consider subscribing. Copyright © 2025 African Business . All rights reserved. Terms of use Cookie Policy Privacy PolicyFactchecking Kenya’s chief justice on judiciary funding and backlog of cases - Africa Check Skip to main content English Français Main navigation Fact-checks Reports Factsheets Guides Spot Checks Blog Meta programme fact-checks Republish our work Who we are Our team Our impact How we are funded Partners Get in touch What we do Info Finder African Fact-Checking Awards Corrections Fact-checking research Training Media Literacy Educator knowledge hub How we fact-check Corrections policy Code of principles How we rate claims Get Involved Donate Submit a claim to fact-check Partner with us Join our team Fact-checking tips Quizzes Donate Back to Africa Check Factchecking Kenya’s chief justice on judiciary funding and backlog of cases Published on 17 September 2020 Claim Six claims about the Kenyan judiciary, from its budget and number of cases to how many judges and magistrates serve Kenya’s population. Verdict Four correct, one understated and one unproven Source Kenya’s chief justice, David Maraga (August 2020) This article is more than 4 years old Maraga was largely correct about the judiciary budget and how many Kenyans are served per judge and magistrate in the country. The chief justice was also correct that the number of cases filed in Kenyan courts every year exceeds the number of cases the judiciary settles by as much as 100,000, causing an ever-growing backlog. But there isn’t evidence of a global average for comparing the number of judges and magistrates per population – there are too many variables in different legal systems. To mark the tenth anniversary of Kenya’s constitution , broadcaster NTV interviewed current and former government officials on how the law has been applied. Chief justice David Maraga told NTV that while the 2010 constitution had sought to strengthen the judiciary’s independence, funding was a perennial headache. “[Budget cuts] hit the judiciary sometimes to a point that its operations grind to a halt,” Maraga said in the interview , published in August 2020. In recent months the chief justice has been vocal on how cuts have hampered the delivery of judicial services. In his interview, Maraga made several claims. We looked into their accuracy. Claim The judiciary does not even get 1% of the national budget Verdict correct Maraga, who assumed office in 2016, asked for more funding as “the judiciary does not even get 1% of the national budget”. “We have said, over and over again, that for the judiciary to operate properly we should get at least 2.5% of the national budget,” he said . Africa Check has previously found there isn’t a “recommended global percentage” of funding for the judiciary from the national budget. In 2018 Maraga also claimed it was 2.5%. To determine how much has been allocated to the judiciary in recent years we consulted the appropriation acts, the laws that show budget allocations to government departments. For the national budget, we checked budget statements. Judiciary amounts as share of Kenya budget Year Judiciary budget (KSh billion) National budget (KSh trillion) Share 2014/15 17.5 1.58 1.1% 2015/16 16.7 2 0.8% 2016/17 17.3 2.3 0.8% 2017/18 17.6 2.3 0.8% 2018/19 14.5 2.6 0.6% 2019/20 18.9 2.8 0.7% 2020/21 17.4 2.8 0.6% Sources: Budget speeches for 2020 , 2019 , 2018 , 2017 , 2016 , 2015 and 2014 and Appropriations Acts for 2020, 2019 , 2018 , 2017 , 2016 , 2015 and 2014 . Note: The figures shown have been rounded up. Only once in the last seven financial years, in 2014/15, did the judiciary receive more than 1% of the national budget. We therefore rate this claim as correct. Claim We have an average of 400,000 cases being filed in our courts every year Verdict correct The most recent state of the judiciary report covers the 2018/19 financial year. Released in January 2020, it shows that more than two million cases were lodged in all courts between 2014/15 and 2018/19. The report said : “The number of filed cases provides quantitative information on the extent of demand for court services by the public.” Total number of cases filed in the judiciary Financial year Cases 2014/15 334,685 2015/16 460,961 2016/17 344,180 2017/18 402,243 2018/19 484,349 Average 405,283 The average number of cases filed in the period covered by the report works out to 405,283 a year. We therefore rate this claim as correct. Claim We only dispose of about 300,000 cases Verdict correct Discussing the country’s case backlog, Maraga said the judiciary settles about 300,000 cases every year. This number was determined by the number of judges and magistrates and would only continue to pile up. “Unless the judiciary is given enough resources to have enough manpower, Kenyans will continue crying about delayed cases,” he said . The most recent state of the judiciary report has data covering 2014/15 to 2018/19. It shows an average of 321,652 cases settled across the five financial years. As of 2018/19 there were 153 judges and 546 magistrates in Kenya. Number of cases resolved by the judiciary Financial year Cases 2014/15 272,605 2015/16 191,625 2016/17 304,182 2017/18 370,488 2018/19 469,359 Average 321,652 We therefore rate the claim as correct. Claim In Kenya now with a population of about 48 million, we have one judge serving over 300,000 people Verdict correct There are 47.6 million people in Kenya, according to 2019 census data. The most recent data from the judiciary shows there were 153 judges as of June 2019. This works out to one judge for every 311,000 people. We rate this claim as correct. Claim We have one magistrate serving over 77,000 people Verdict understated The most recent data from the judiciary shows there were 546 magistrates in Kenya as of June 2019. The state of the judiciary report was released in January 2020. Using a population of 47.6 million , this works out to one magistrate for every 87,114 people. The chief justice’s figure was off by over 10,000 but it was still “over 77,000” people per magistrate. We therefore rate it as understated. Claim There is a ‘global average’ for the number of judges and magistrates to number of people Verdict unproven A calculation for a “global average” can be achieved by directly comparing the number of judges and magistrates to the world population. But to account for population differences, rates (per 100,000 people) are widely used . ( Note: See box below for more context. ) The chief justice has in the past spoken of a “recommended global percentage” of funding for the judiciary. We have contacted the judiciary for the source of the "global average" cited by the chief justice and will update this report with their response. Wachira Maina is a constitutional lawyer in Kenya who has written about the progress of institutions, including the judiciary, following the adoption of the 2010 constitution. He directed us to the UN Office of Drug and Crime (UNODC) for data on the administration of justice professionals against a country’s population. It shows there were 1.3 judges or magistrates for every 100,000 people in Kenya in 2014, 3.6 for South Africa in 2015, and 0.8 for the US and 8.7 for China in 2017. But the UNODC noted key weaknesses in the data when comparing countries. “The numbers reported are not restricted to judges deciding criminal cases,” it said. “The comparability problem might get even worse because some countries might still only report the number of judges whose duty is the judgment of criminal cases. “Apart from this, it is not clear whether really all judges are included in the reported figures in all countries.” Without a source for the chief justice’s claim of a global average, we can only rate this final claim as unproven. Is calculating the ratio of judges and magistrates to the population useful? The ratio of judges and magistrates to the population is useful depending on what you’re using it to show, Wachira Maina , a constitutional lawyer in Kenya told Africa Check. He gave an example of using the ratio of the number of doctors to the population as a metric for access to health, and of police officers to measure access to security services. However, he said, ratio data leaves a lot unstated, such as the distribution by region and by urban and rural areas. Therefore “to determine access to services, you will almost certainly need additional information”. “A high ratio by itself does not prove that most people have access to services, merely that if services were equitably distributed, and they rarely are, more people would have access,” Maina said. “Keep in mind though that you cannot increase access unless you have the numbers, so the ratio does still say something useful.” Chris Kerkering is a litigation manager at Katiba Institute , an organisation in Nairobi that promotes the knowledge of Kenya’s constitution. He told Africa Check that population does not automatically equate to a judge’s caseload. A very litigious society would have more cases per population, he said. Caseload and caseload weighting, which Kerkering described as not only counting the number of cases but also being able to determine how much time each respective case would take , may be the best way to determine whether a judiciary has the appropriate number of judges. But since doing a comparison between different countries with different legal systems and different cultures would be near impossible, “judges per population is a decent aggregate”, Kerkering said. He said the chief justice’s focus was on access to justice. “If there are not enough judges and the staff that support them then they are unable to provide the services that the judiciary requires. Case backlogs become one of the more obvious problems. Fewer judges mean that each judge is taking more cases.” “The more cases a judge has, the more time it takes to get through them. Access to justice requires timely decisions. The phrase ‘justice delayed is justice denied,’ is so commonly used for a reason. Often, as a case winds its way through the court system, avoidable delays result in long term harm.” “A judiciary that can’t get through its caseload promptly can’t ensure access to justice as required by the constitution.” Carlos Mureithi is a journalist based in Nairobi, Kenya Further reading: https://africacheck.org/reports/budget-cuts-hit-kenyas-judiciary-but-theres-no-global-funding-target/ Republish our content for free We believe that everyone needs the facts. You can republish the text of this article free of charge, both online and in print. However, we ask that you pay attention to these simple guidelines . In a nutshell: 1. Do not include images, as in most cases we do not own the copyright. 2. Please do not edit the article. 3. Make sure you credit "Africa Check" in the byline and don't forget to mention that the article was originally published on africacheck.org . Name Surname Email Leave this field blank Carlos Mureithi Claim Six claims about the Kenyan judiciary, from its budget and number of cases to how many judges and magistrates serve Kenya’s population. Verdict Four correct, one understated and one unproven Source Kenya’s chief justice, David Maraga (August 2020) Join us on WhatsApp Further Reading false Nigeria Trump USAid funding No, Trump cut USAid funding to Nigeria – and elsewhere – because of US interests, not because of corrupt Nigerian politicians false South Africa HIV HIV/AIDS United States funding government false claim No, 100% of South Africa’s HIV/Aids funding does not come from the United States – mostly funded by the South African government Nigeria budget debt policing Osita Chidoka aviation minister Fact-checking former minister Osita Chidoka's claims on Nigeria's 2025 budget, debt and policing Add new comment Your name Comment About text formats Restricted HTML Allowed HTML tags: <a href hreflang> <em> <strong> <cite> <blockquote cite> <code> <ul type> <ol start type> <li> <dl> <dt> <dd> <h2 id> <h3 id> <h4 id> <h5 id> <h6 id> Lines and paragraphs break automatically. Web page addresses and email addresses turn into links automatically. limit: 600 characters Leave this field blank Sign up to our newsletter Name Africa Check values your trust and is committed to the responsible management, use and protection of personal information. See our privacy policy. Leave this field blank Spot Checks View All false Nigeria Trump USAid funding No, Trump cut USAid funding to Nigeria – and elsewhere – because of US interests, not because of corrupt Nigerian politicians false South Africa HIV HIV/AIDS United States funding government false claim No, 100% of South Africa’s HIV/Aids funding does not come from the United States – mostly funded by the South African government Nigeria budget debt policing Osita Chidoka aviation minister Fact-checking former minister Osita Chidoka's claims on Nigeria's 2025 budget, debt and policing We hold public figures accountable For democracy to function, public figures need to be held to account for what they say. The claims they make need to be checked, openly and impartially. Africa Check is an independent, non-partisan organisation which assesses claims made in the public arena using journalistic skills and evidence drawn from the latest online tools, readers, public sources and experts, sorting fact from fiction and publishing the results. Browse by category Health Covid-19 Education Crime Economy Kenya Nigeria Senegal South Africa Sign up to our newsletter Name Africa Check values your trust and is committed to the responsible management, use and protection of personal information. See our privacy policy. Leave this field blank Follow us Facebook Twitter Instagram TikTok Footer About Partner With Us Terms and Conditions Contact Us Sitemap Want to keep reading our fact-checks? We will never charge you for verified, reliable information. Help us keep it that way by supporting our work. Become a newsletter subscriber Name Africa Check values your trust and is committed to the responsible management, use and protection of personal information. See our privacy policy. Leave this field blank Support independent fact-checking in Africa. See our donation optionsFactchecking Kenya’s chief justice on judiciary funding and backlog of cases - Africa Check Skip to main content English Français Main navigation Fact-checks Reports Factsheets Guides Spot Checks Blog Meta programme fact-checks Republish our work Who we are Our team Our impact How we are funded Partners Get in touch What we do Info Finder African Fact-Checking Awards Corrections Fact-checking research Training Media Literacy Educator knowledge hub How we fact-check Corrections policy Code of principles How we rate claims Get Involved Donate Submit a claim to fact-check Partner with us Join our team Fact-checking tips Quizzes Donate Back to Africa Check Factchecking Kenya’s chief justice on judiciary funding and backlog of cases Published on 17 September 2020 Claim Six claims about the Kenyan judiciary, from its budget and number of cases to how many judges and magistrates serve Kenya’s population. Verdict Four correct, one understated and one unproven Source Kenya’s chief justice, David Maraga (August 2020) This article is more than 4 years old Maraga was largely correct about the judiciary budget and how many Kenyans are served per judge and magistrate in the country. The chief justice was also correct that the number of cases filed in Kenyan courts every year exceeds the number of cases the judiciary settles by as much as 100,000, causing an ever-growing backlog. But there isn’t evidence of a global average for comparing the number of judges and magistrates per population – there are too many variables in different legal systems. To mark the tenth anniversary of Kenya’s constitution , broadcaster NTV interviewed current and former government officials on how the law has been applied. Chief justice David Maraga told NTV that while the 2010 constitution had sought to strengthen the judiciary’s independence, funding was a perennial headache. “[Budget cuts] hit the judiciary sometimes to a point that its operations grind to a halt,” Maraga said in the interview , published in August 2020. In recent months the chief justice has been vocal on how cuts have hampered the delivery of judicial services. In his interview, Maraga made several claims. We looked into their accuracy. Claim The judiciary does not even get 1% of the national budget Verdict correct Maraga, who assumed office in 2016, asked for more funding as “the judiciary does not even get 1% of the national budget”. “We have said, over and over again, that for the judiciary to operate properly we should get at least 2.5% of the national budget,” he said . Africa Check has previously found there isn’t a “recommended global percentage” of funding for the judiciary from the national budget. In 2018 Maraga also claimed it was 2.5%. To determine how much has been allocated to the judiciary in recent years we consulted the appropriation acts, the laws that show budget allocations to government departments. For the national budget, we checked budget statements. Judiciary amounts as share of Kenya budget Year Judiciary budget (KSh billion) National budget (KSh trillion) Share 2014/15 17.5 1.58 1.1% 2015/16 16.7 2 0.8% 2016/17 17.3 2.3 0.8% 2017/18 17.6 2.3 0.8% 2018/19 14.5 2.6 0.6% 2019/20 18.9 2.8 0.7% 2020/21 17.4 2.8 0.6% Sources: Budget speeches for 2020 , 2019 , 2018 , 2017 , 2016 , 2015 and 2014 and Appropriations Acts for 2020, 2019 , 2018 , 2017 , 2016 , 2015 and 2014 . Note: The figures shown have been rounded up. Only once in the last seven financial years, in 2014/15, did the judiciary receive more than 1% of the national budget. We therefore rate this claim as correct. Claim We have an average of 400,000 cases being filed in our courts every year Verdict correct The most recent state of the judiciary report covers the 2018/19 financial year. Released in January 2020, it shows that more than two million cases were lodged in all courts between 2014/15 and 2018/19. The report said : “The number of filed cases provides quantitative information on the extent of demand for court services by the public.” Total number of cases filed in the judiciary Financial year Cases 2014/15 334,685 2015/16 460,961 2016/17 344,180 2017/18 402,243 2018/19 484,349 Average 405,283 The average number of cases filed in the period covered by the report works out to 405,283 a year. We therefore rate this claim as correct. Claim We only dispose of about 300,000 cases Verdict correct Discussing the country’s case backlog, Maraga said the judiciary settles about 300,000 cases every year. This number was determined by the number of judges and magistrates and would only continue to pile up. “Unless the judiciary is given enough resources to have enough manpower, Kenyans will continue crying about delayed cases,” he said . The most recent state of the judiciary report has data covering 2014/15 to 2018/19. It shows an average of 321,652 cases settled across the five financial years. As of 2018/19 there were 153 judges and 546 magistrates in Kenya. Number of cases resolved by the judiciary Financial year Cases 2014/15 272,605 2015/16 191,625 2016/17 304,182 2017/18 370,488 2018/19 469,359 Average 321,652 We therefore rate the claim as correct. Claim In Kenya now with a population of about 48 million, we have one judge serving over 300,000 people Verdict correct There are 47.6 million people in Kenya, according to 2019 census data. The most recent data from the judiciary shows there were 153 judges as of June 2019. This works out to one judge for every 311,000 people. We rate this claim as correct. Claim We have one magistrate serving over 77,000 people Verdict understated The most recent data from the judiciary shows there were 546 magistrates in Kenya as of June 2019. The state of the judiciary report was released in January 2020. Using a population of 47.6 million , this works out to one magistrate for every 87,114 people. The chief justice’s figure was off by over 10,000 but it was still “over 77,000” people per magistrate. We therefore rate it as understated. Claim There is a ‘global average’ for the number of judges and magistrates to number of people Verdict unproven A calculation for a “global average” can be achieved by directly comparing the number of judges and magistrates to the world population. But to account for population differences, rates (per 100,000 people) are widely used . ( Note: See box below for more context. ) The chief justice has in the past spoken of a “recommended global percentage” of funding for the judiciary. We have contacted the judiciary for the source of the "global average" cited by the chief justice and will update this report with their response. Wachira Maina is a constitutional lawyer in Kenya who has written about the progress of institutions, including the judiciary, following the adoption of the 2010 constitution. He directed us to the UN Office of Drug and Crime (UNODC) for data on the administration of justice professionals against a country’s population. It shows there were 1.3 judges or magistrates for every 100,000 people in Kenya in 2014, 3.6 for South Africa in 2015, and 0.8 for the US and 8.7 for China in 2017. But the UNODC noted key weaknesses in the data when comparing countries. “The numbers reported are not restricted to judges deciding criminal cases,” it said. “The comparability problem might get even worse because some countries might still only report the number of judges whose duty is the judgment of criminal cases. “Apart from this, it is not clear whether really all judges are included in the reported figures in all countries.” Without a source for the chief justice’s claim of a global average, we can only rate this final claim as unproven. Is calculating the ratio of judges and magistrates to the population useful? The ratio of judges and magistrates to the population is useful depending on what you’re using it to show, Wachira Maina , a constitutional lawyer in Kenya told Africa Check. He gave an example of using the ratio of the number of doctors to the population as a metric for access to health, and of police officers to measure access to security services. However, he said, ratio data leaves a lot unstated, such as the distribution by region and by urban and rural areas. Therefore “to determine access to services, you will almost certainly need additional information”. “A high ratio by itself does not prove that most people have access to services, merely that if services were equitably distributed, and they rarely are, more people would have access,” Maina said. “Keep in mind though that you cannot increase access unless you have the numbers, so the ratio does still say something useful.” Chris Kerkering is a litigation manager at Katiba Institute , an organisation in Nairobi that promotes the knowledge of Kenya’s constitution. He told Africa Check that population does not automatically equate to a judge’s caseload. A very litigious society would have more cases per population, he said. Caseload and caseload weighting, which Kerkering described as not only counting the number of cases but also being able to determine how much time each respective case would take , may be the best way to determine whether a judiciary has the appropriate number of judges. But since doing a comparison between different countries with different legal systems and different cultures would be near impossible, “judges per population is a decent aggregate”, Kerkering said. He said the chief justice’s focus was on access to justice. “If there are not enough judges and the staff that support them then they are unable to provide the services that the judiciary requires. Case backlogs become one of the more obvious problems. Fewer judges mean that each judge is taking more cases.” “The more cases a judge has, the more time it takes to get through them. Access to justice requires timely decisions. The phrase ‘justice delayed is justice denied,’ is so commonly used for a reason. Often, as a case winds its way through the court system, avoidable delays result in long term harm.” “A judiciary that can’t get through its caseload promptly can’t ensure access to justice as required by the constitution.” Carlos Mureithi is a journalist based in Nairobi, Kenya Further reading: https://africacheck.org/reports/budget-cuts-hit-kenyas-judiciary-but-theres-no-global-funding-target/ Republish our content for free We believe that everyone needs the facts. You can republish the text of this article free of charge, both online and in print. However, we ask that you pay attention to these simple guidelines . In a nutshell: 1. Do not include images, as in most cases we do not own the copyright. 2. Please do not edit the article. 3. Make sure you credit "Africa Check" in the byline and don't forget to mention that the article was originally published on africacheck.org . Name Surname Email Leave this field blank Carlos Mureithi Claim Six claims about the Kenyan judiciary, from its budget and number of cases to how many judges and magistrates serve Kenya’s population. Verdict Four correct, one understated and one unproven Source Kenya’s chief justice, David Maraga (August 2020) Join us on WhatsApp Further Reading false Nigeria Trump USAid funding No, Trump cut USAid funding to Nigeria – and elsewhere – because of US interests, not because of corrupt Nigerian politicians false South Africa HIV HIV/AIDS United States funding government false claim No, 100% of South Africa’s HIV/Aids funding does not come from the United States – mostly funded by the South African government Nigeria budget debt policing Osita Chidoka aviation minister Fact-checking former minister Osita Chidoka's claims on Nigeria's 2025 budget, debt and policing Add new comment Your name Comment About text formats Restricted HTML Allowed HTML tags: <a href hreflang> <em> <strong> <cite> <blockquote cite> <code> <ul type> <ol start type> <li> <dl> <dt> <dd> <h2 id> <h3 id> <h4 id> <h5 id> <h6 id> Lines and paragraphs break automatically. Web page addresses and email addresses turn into links automatically. limit: 600 characters Leave this field blank Sign up to our newsletter Name Africa Check values your trust and is committed to the responsible management, use and protection of personal information. See our privacy policy. Leave this field blank Spot Checks View All false Nigeria Trump USAid funding No, Trump cut USAid funding to Nigeria – and elsewhere – because of US interests, not because of corrupt Nigerian politicians false South Africa HIV HIV/AIDS United States funding government false claim No, 100% of South Africa’s HIV/Aids funding does not come from the United States – mostly funded by the South African government Nigeria budget debt policing Osita Chidoka aviation minister Fact-checking former minister Osita Chidoka's claims on Nigeria's 2025 budget, debt and policing We hold public figures accountable For democracy to function, public figures need to be held to account for what they say. The claims they make need to be checked, openly and impartially. Africa Check is an independent, non-partisan organisation which assesses claims made in the public arena using journalistic skills and evidence drawn from the latest online tools, readers, public sources and experts, sorting fact from fiction and publishing the results. Browse by category Health Covid-19 Education Crime Economy Kenya Nigeria Senegal South Africa Sign up to our newsletter Name Africa Check values your trust and is committed to the responsible management, use and protection of personal information. See our privacy policy. Leave this field blank Follow us Facebook Twitter Instagram TikTok Footer About Partner With Us Terms and Conditions Contact Us Sitemap Want to keep reading our fact-checks? We will never charge you for verified, reliable information. Help us keep it that way by supporting our work. Become a newsletter subscriber Name Africa Check values your trust and is committed to the responsible management, use and protection of personal information. See our privacy policy. Leave this field blank Support independent fact-checking in Africa. See our donation optionsFactchecking Kenya’s chief justice on judiciary funding and backlog of cases - Africa Check Skip to main content English Français Main navigation Fact-checks Reports Factsheets Guides Spot Checks Blog Meta programme fact-checks Republish our work Who we are Our team Our impact How we are funded Partners Get in touch What we do Info Finder African Fact-Checking Awards Corrections Fact-checking research Training Media Literacy Educator knowledge hub How we fact-check Corrections policy Code of principles How we rate claims Get Involved Donate Submit a claim to fact-check Partner with us Join our team Fact-checking tips Quizzes Donate Back to Africa Check Factchecking Kenya’s chief justice on judiciary funding and backlog of cases Published on 17 September 2020 Claim Six claims about the Kenyan judiciary, from its budget and number of cases to how many judges and magistrates serve Kenya’s population. Verdict Four correct, one understated and one unproven Source Kenya’s chief justice, David Maraga (August 2020) This article is more than 4 years old Maraga was largely correct about the judiciary budget and how many Kenyans are served per judge and magistrate in the country. The chief justice was also correct that the number of cases filed in Kenyan courts every year exceeds the number of cases the judiciary settles by as much as 100,000, causing an ever-growing backlog. But there isn’t evidence of a global average for comparing the number of judges and magistrates per population – there are too many variables in different legal systems. To mark the tenth anniversary of Kenya’s constitution , broadcaster NTV interviewed current and former government officials on how the law has been applied. Chief justice David Maraga told NTV that while the 2010 constitution had sought to strengthen the judiciary’s independence, funding was a perennial headache. “[Budget cuts] hit the judiciary sometimes to a point that its operations grind to a halt,” Maraga said in the interview , published in August 2020. In recent months the chief justice has been vocal on how cuts have hampered the delivery of judicial services. In his interview, Maraga made several claims. We looked into their accuracy. Claim The judiciary does not even get 1% of the national budget Verdict correct Maraga, who assumed office in 2016, asked for more funding as “the judiciary does not even get 1% of the national budget”. “We have said, over and over again, that for the judiciary to operate properly we should get at least 2.5% of the national budget,” he said . Africa Check has previously found there isn’t a “recommended global percentage” of funding for the judiciary from the national budget. In 2018 Maraga also claimed it was 2.5%. To determine how much has been allocated to the judiciary in recent years we consulted the appropriation acts, the laws that show budget allocations to government departments. For the national budget, we checked budget statements. Judiciary amounts as share of Kenya budget Year Judiciary budget (KSh billion) National budget (KSh trillion) Share 2014/15 17.5 1.58 1.1% 2015/16 16.7 2 0.8% 2016/17 17.3 2.3 0.8% 2017/18 17.6 2.3 0.8% 2018/19 14.5 2.6 0.6% 2019/20 18.9 2.8 0.7% 2020/21 17.4 2.8 0.6% Sources: Budget speeches for 2020 , 2019 , 2018 , 2017 , 2016 , 2015 and 2014 and Appropriations Acts for 2020, 2019 , 2018 , 2017 , 2016 , 2015 and 2014 . Note: The figures shown have been rounded up. Only once in the last seven financial years, in 2014/15, did the judiciary receive more than 1% of the national budget. We therefore rate this claim as correct. Claim We have an average of 400,000 cases being filed in our courts every year Verdict correct The most recent state of the judiciary report covers the 2018/19 financial year. Released in January 2020, it shows that more than two million cases were lodged in all courts between 2014/15 and 2018/19. The report said : “The number of filed cases provides quantitative information on the extent of demand for court services by the public.” Total number of cases filed in the judiciary Financial year Cases 2014/15 334,685 2015/16 460,961 2016/17 344,180 2017/18 402,243 2018/19 484,349 Average 405,283 The average number of cases filed in the period covered by the report works out to 405,283 a year. We therefore rate this claim as correct. Claim We only dispose of about 300,000 cases Verdict correct Discussing the country’s case backlog, Maraga said the judiciary settles about 300,000 cases every year. This number was determined by the number of judges and magistrates and would only continue to pile up. “Unless the judiciary is given enough resources to have enough manpower, Kenyans will continue crying about delayed cases,” he said . The most recent state of the judiciary report has data covering 2014/15 to 2018/19. It shows an average of 321,652 cases settled across the five financial years. As of 2018/19 there were 153 judges and 546 magistrates in Kenya. Number of cases resolved by the judiciary Financial year Cases 2014/15 272,605 2015/16 191,625 2016/17 304,182 2017/18 370,488 2018/19 469,359 Average 321,652 We therefore rate the claim as correct. Claim In Kenya now with a population of about 48 million, we have one judge serving over 300,000 people Verdict correct There are 47.6 million people in Kenya, according to 2019 census data. The most recent data from the judiciary shows there were 153 judges as of June 2019. This works out to one judge for every 311,000 people. We rate this claim as correct. Claim We have one magistrate serving over 77,000 people Verdict understated The most recent data from the judiciary shows there were 546 magistrates in Kenya as of June 2019. The state of the judiciary report was released in January 2020. Using a population of 47.6 million , this works out to one magistrate for every 87,114 people. The chief justice’s figure was off by over 10,000 but it was still “over 77,000” people per magistrate. We therefore rate it as understated. Claim There is a ‘global average’ for the number of judges and magistrates to number of people Verdict unproven A calculation for a “global average” can be achieved by directly comparing the number of judges and magistrates to the world population. But to account for population differences, rates (per 100,000 people) are widely used . ( Note: See box below for more context. ) The chief justice has in the past spoken of a “recommended global percentage” of funding for the judiciary. We have contacted the judiciary for the source of the "global average" cited by the chief justice and will update this report with their response. Wachira Maina is a constitutional lawyer in Kenya who has written about the progress of institutions, including the judiciary, following the adoption of the 2010 constitution. He directed us to the UN Office of Drug and Crime (UNODC) for data on the administration of justice professionals against a country’s population. It shows there were 1.3 judges or magistrates for every 100,000 people in Kenya in 2014, 3.6 for South Africa in 2015, and 0.8 for the US and 8.7 for China in 2017. But the UNODC noted key weaknesses in the data when comparing countries. “The numbers reported are not restricted to judges deciding criminal cases,” it said. “The comparability problem might get even worse because some countries might still only report the number of judges whose duty is the judgment of criminal cases. “Apart from this, it is not clear whether really all judges are included in the reported figures in all countries.” Without a source for the chief justice’s claim of a global average, we can only rate this final claim as unproven. Is calculating the ratio of judges and magistrates to the population useful? The ratio of judges and magistrates to the population is useful depending on what you’re using it to show, Wachira Maina , a constitutional lawyer in Kenya told Africa Check. He gave an example of using the ratio of the number of doctors to the population as a metric for access to health, and of police officers to measure access to security services. However, he said, ratio data leaves a lot unstated, such as the distribution by region and by urban and rural areas. Therefore “to determine access to services, you will almost certainly need additional information”. “A high ratio by itself does not prove that most people have access to services, merely that if services were equitably distributed, and they rarely are, more people would have access,” Maina said. “Keep in mind though that you cannot increase access unless you have the numbers, so the ratio does still say something useful.” Chris Kerkering is a litigation manager at Katiba Institute , an organisation in Nairobi that promotes the knowledge of Kenya’s constitution. He told Africa Check that population does not automatically equate to a judge’s caseload. A very litigious society would have more cases per population, he said. Caseload and caseload weighting, which Kerkering described as not only counting the number of cases but also being able to determine how much time each respective case would take , may be the best way to determine whether a judiciary has the appropriate number of judges. But since doing a comparison between different countries with different legal systems and different cultures would be near impossible, “judges per population is a decent aggregate”, Kerkering said. He said the chief justice’s focus was on access to justice. “If there are not enough judges and the staff that support them then they are unable to provide the services that the judiciary requires. Case backlogs become one of the more obvious problems. Fewer judges mean that each judge is taking more cases.” “The more cases a judge has, the more time it takes to get through them. Access to justice requires timely decisions. The phrase ‘justice delayed is justice denied,’ is so commonly used for a reason. Often, as a case winds its way through the court system, avoidable delays result in long term harm.” “A judiciary that can’t get through its caseload promptly can’t ensure access to justice as required by the constitution.” Carlos Mureithi is a journalist based in Nairobi, Kenya Further reading: https://africacheck.org/reports/budget-cuts-hit-kenyas-judiciary-but-theres-no-global-funding-target/ Republish our content for free We believe that everyone needs the facts. You can republish the text of this article free of charge, both online and in print. However, we ask that you pay attention to these simple guidelines . In a nutshell: 1. Do not include images, as in most cases we do not own the copyright. 2. Please do not edit the article. 3. Make sure you credit "Africa Check" in the byline and don't forget to mention that the article was originally published on africacheck.org . Name Surname Email Leave this field blank Carlos Mureithi Claim Six claims about the Kenyan judiciary, from its budget and number of cases to how many judges and magistrates serve Kenya’s population. Verdict Four correct, one understated and one unproven Source Kenya’s chief justice, David Maraga (August 2020) Join us on WhatsApp Further Reading false Nigeria Trump USAid funding No, Trump cut USAid funding to Nigeria – and elsewhere – because of US interests, not because of corrupt Nigerian politicians false South Africa HIV HIV/AIDS United States funding government false claim No, 100% of South Africa’s HIV/Aids funding does not come from the United States – mostly funded by the South African government Nigeria budget debt policing Osita Chidoka aviation minister Fact-checking former minister Osita Chidoka's claims on Nigeria's 2025 budget, debt and policing Add new comment Your name Comment About text formats Restricted HTML Allowed HTML tags: <a href hreflang> <em> <strong> <cite> <blockquote cite> <code> <ul type> <ol start type> <li> <dl> <dt> <dd> <h2 id> <h3 id> <h4 id> <h5 id> <h6 id> Lines and paragraphs break automatically. Web page addresses and email addresses turn into links automatically. limit: 600 characters Leave this field blank Sign up to our newsletter Name Africa Check values your trust and is committed to the responsible management, use and protection of personal information. See our privacy policy. Leave this field blank Spot Checks View All false Nigeria Trump USAid funding No, Trump cut USAid funding to Nigeria – and elsewhere – because of US interests, not because of corrupt Nigerian politicians false South Africa HIV HIV/AIDS United States funding government false claim No, 100% of South Africa’s HIV/Aids funding does not come from the United States – mostly funded by the South African government Nigeria budget debt policing Osita Chidoka aviation minister Fact-checking former minister Osita Chidoka's claims on Nigeria's 2025 budget, debt and policing We hold public figures accountable For democracy to function, public figures need to be held to account for what they say. The claims they make need to be checked, openly and impartially. Africa Check is an independent, non-partisan organisation which assesses claims made in the public arena using journalistic skills and evidence drawn from the latest online tools, readers, public sources and experts, sorting fact from fiction and publishing the results. Browse by category Health Covid-19 Education Crime Economy Kenya Nigeria Senegal South Africa Sign up to our newsletter Name Africa Check values your trust and is committed to the responsible management, use and protection of personal information. See our privacy policy. Leave this field blank Follow us Facebook Twitter Instagram TikTok Footer About Partner With Us Terms and Conditions Contact Us Sitemap Want to keep reading our fact-checks? We will never charge you for verified, reliable information. Help us keep it that way by supporting our work. Become a newsletter subscriber Name Africa Check values your trust and is committed to the responsible management, use and protection of personal information. See our privacy policy. Leave this field blank Support independent fact-checking in Africa. See our donation optionsFactchecking Kenya’s chief justice on judiciary funding and backlog of cases - Africa Check Skip to main content English Français Main navigation Fact-checks Reports Factsheets Guides Spot Checks Blog Meta programme fact-checks Republish our work Who we are Our team Our impact How we are funded Partners Get in touch What we do Info Finder African Fact-Checking Awards Corrections Fact-checking research Training Media Literacy Educator knowledge hub How we fact-check Corrections policy Code of principles How we rate claims Get Involved Donate Submit a claim to fact-check Partner with us Join our team Fact-checking tips Quizzes Donate Back to Africa Check Factchecking Kenya’s chief justice on judiciary funding and backlog of cases Published on 17 September 2020 Claim Six claims about the Kenyan judiciary, from its budget and number of cases to how many judges and magistrates serve Kenya’s population. Verdict Four correct, one understated and one unproven Source Kenya’s chief justice, David Maraga (August 2020) This article is more than 4 years old Maraga was largely correct about the judiciary budget and how many Kenyans are served per judge and magistrate in the country. The chief justice was also correct that the number of cases filed in Kenyan courts every year exceeds the number of cases the judiciary settles by as much as 100,000, causing an ever-growing backlog. But there isn’t evidence of a global average for comparing the number of judges and magistrates per population – there are too many variables in different legal systems. To mark the tenth anniversary of Kenya’s constitution , broadcaster NTV interviewed current and former government officials on how the law has been applied. Chief justice David Maraga told NTV that while the 2010 constitution had sought to strengthen the judiciary’s independence, funding was a perennial headache. “[Budget cuts] hit the judiciary sometimes to a point that its operations grind to a halt,” Maraga said in the interview , published in August 2020. In recent months the chief justice has been vocal on how cuts have hampered the delivery of judicial services. In his interview, Maraga made several claims. We looked into their accuracy. Claim The judiciary does not even get 1% of the national budget Verdict correct Maraga, who assumed office in 2016, asked for more funding as “the judiciary does not even get 1% of the national budget”. “We have said, over and over again, that for the judiciary to operate properly we should get at least 2.5% of the national budget,” he said . Africa Check has previously found there isn’t a “recommended global percentage” of funding for the judiciary from the national budget. In 2018 Maraga also claimed it was 2.5%. To determine how much has been allocated to the judiciary in recent years we consulted the appropriation acts, the laws that show budget allocations to government departments. For the national budget, we checked budget statements. Judiciary amounts as share of Kenya budget Year Judiciary budget (KSh billion) National budget (KSh trillion) Share 2014/15 17.5 1.58 1.1% 2015/16 16.7 2 0.8% 2016/17 17.3 2.3 0.8% 2017/18 17.6 2.3 0.8% 2018/19 14.5 2.6 0.6% 2019/20 18.9 2.8 0.7% 2020/21 17.4 2.8 0.6% Sources: Budget speeches for 2020 , 2019 , 2018 , 2017 , 2016 , 2015 and 2014 and Appropriations Acts for 2020, 2019 , 2018 , 2017 , 2016 , 2015 and 2014 . Note: The figures shown have been rounded up. Only once in the last seven financial years, in 2014/15, did the judiciary receive more than 1% of the national budget. We therefore rate this claim as correct. Claim We have an average of 400,000 cases being filed in our courts every year Verdict correct The most recent state of the judiciary report covers the 2018/19 financial year. Released in January 2020, it shows that more than two million cases were lodged in all courts between 2014/15 and 2018/19. The report said : “The number of filed cases provides quantitative information on the extent of demand for court services by the public.” Total number of cases filed in the judiciary Financial year Cases 2014/15 334,685 2015/16 460,961 2016/17 344,180 2017/18 402,243 2018/19 484,349 Average 405,283 The average number of cases filed in the period covered by the report works out to 405,283 a year. We therefore rate this claim as correct. Claim We only dispose of about 300,000 cases Verdict correct Discussing the country’s case backlog, Maraga said the judiciary settles about 300,000 cases every year. This number was determined by the number of judges and magistrates and would only continue to pile up. “Unless the judiciary is given enough resources to have enough manpower, Kenyans will continue crying about delayed cases,” he said . The most recent state of the judiciary report has data covering 2014/15 to 2018/19. It shows an average of 321,652 cases settled across the five financial years. As of 2018/19 there were 153 judges and 546 magistrates in Kenya. Number of cases resolved by the judiciary Financial year Cases 2014/15 272,605 2015/16 191,625 2016/17 304,182 2017/18 370,488 2018/19 469,359 Average 321,652 We therefore rate the claim as correct. Claim In Kenya now with a population of about 48 million, we have one judge serving over 300,000 people Verdict correct There are 47.6 million people in Kenya, according to 2019 census data. The most recent data from the judiciary shows there were 153 judges as of June 2019. This works out to one judge for every 311,000 people. We rate this claim as correct. Claim We have one magistrate serving over 77,000 people Verdict understated The most recent data from the judiciary shows there were 546 magistrates in Kenya as of June 2019. The state of the judiciary report was released in January 2020. Using a population of 47.6 million , this works out to one magistrate for every 87,114 people. The chief justice’s figure was off by over 10,000 but it was still “over 77,000” people per magistrate. We therefore rate it as understated. Claim There is a ‘global average’ for the number of judges and magistrates to number of people Verdict unproven A calculation for a “global average” can be achieved by directly comparing the number of judges and magistrates to the world population. But to account for population differences, rates (per 100,000 people) are widely used . ( Note: See box below for more context. ) The chief justice has in the past spoken of a “recommended global percentage” of funding for the judiciary. We have contacted the judiciary for the source of the "global average" cited by the chief justice and will update this report with their response. Wachira Maina is a constitutional lawyer in Kenya who has written about the progress of institutions, including the judiciary, following the adoption of the 2010 constitution. He directed us to the UN Office of Drug and Crime (UNODC) for data on the administration of justice professionals against a country’s population. It shows there were 1.3 judges or magistrates for every 100,000 people in Kenya in 2014, 3.6 for South Africa in 2015, and 0.8 for the US and 8.7 for China in 2017. But the UNODC noted key weaknesses in the data when comparing countries. “The numbers reported are not restricted to judges deciding criminal cases,” it said. “The comparability problem might get even worse because some countries might still only report the number of judges whose duty is the judgment of criminal cases. “Apart from this, it is not clear whether really all judges are included in the reported figures in all countries.” Without a source for the chief justice’s claim of a global average, we can only rate this final claim as unproven. Is calculating the ratio of judges and magistrates to the population useful? The ratio of judges and magistrates to the population is useful depending on what you’re using it to show, Wachira Maina , a constitutional lawyer in Kenya told Africa Check. He gave an example of using the ratio of the number of doctors to the population as a metric for access to health, and of police officers to measure access to security services. However, he said, ratio data leaves a lot unstated, such as the distribution by region and by urban and rural areas. Therefore “to determine access to services, you will almost certainly need additional information”. “A high ratio by itself does not prove that most people have access to services, merely that if services were equitably distributed, and they rarely are, more people would have access,” Maina said. “Keep in mind though that you cannot increase access unless you have the numbers, so the ratio does still say something useful.” Chris Kerkering is a litigation manager at Katiba Institute , an organisation in Nairobi that promotes the knowledge of Kenya’s constitution. He told Africa Check that population does not automatically equate to a judge’s caseload. A very litigious society would have more cases per population, he said. Caseload and caseload weighting, which Kerkering described as not only counting the number of cases but also being able to determine how much time each respective case would take , may be the best way to determine whether a judiciary has the appropriate number of judges. But since doing a comparison between different countries with different legal systems and different cultures would be near impossible, “judges per population is a decent aggregate”, Kerkering said. He said the chief justice’s focus was on access to justice. “If there are not enough judges and the staff that support them then they are unable to provide the services that the judiciary requires. Case backlogs become one of the more obvious problems. Fewer judges mean that each judge is taking more cases.” “The more cases a judge has, the more time it takes to get through them. Access to justice requires timely decisions. The phrase ‘justice delayed is justice denied,’ is so commonly used for a reason. Often, as a case winds its way through the court system, avoidable delays result in long term harm.” “A judiciary that can’t get through its caseload promptly can’t ensure access to justice as required by the constitution.” Carlos Mureithi is a journalist based in Nairobi, Kenya Further reading: https://africacheck.org/reports/budget-cuts-hit-kenyas-judiciary-but-theres-no-global-funding-target/ Republish our content for free We believe that everyone needs the facts. You can republish the text of this article free of charge, both online and in print. However, we ask that you pay attention to these simple guidelines . In a nutshell: 1. Do not include images, as in most cases we do not own the copyright. 2. Please do not edit the article. 3. Make sure you credit "Africa Check" in the byline and don't forget to mention that the article was originally published on africacheck.org . Name Surname Email Leave this field blank Carlos Mureithi Claim Six claims about the Kenyan judiciary, from its budget and number of cases to how many judges and magistrates serve Kenya’s population. Verdict Four correct, one understated and one unproven Source Kenya’s chief justice, David Maraga (August 2020) Join us on WhatsApp Further Reading false Nigeria Trump USAid funding No, Trump cut USAid funding to Nigeria – and elsewhere – because of US interests, not because of corrupt Nigerian politicians false South Africa HIV HIV/AIDS United States funding government false claim No, 100% of South Africa’s HIV/Aids funding does not come from the United States – mostly funded by the South African government Nigeria budget debt policing Osita Chidoka aviation minister Fact-checking former minister Osita Chidoka's claims on Nigeria's 2025 budget, debt and policing Add new comment Your name Comment About text formats Restricted HTML Allowed HTML tags: <a href hreflang> <em> <strong> <cite> <blockquote cite> <code> <ul type> <ol start type> <li> <dl> <dt> <dd> <h2 id> <h3 id> <h4 id> <h5 id> <h6 id> Lines and paragraphs break automatically. Web page addresses and email addresses turn into links automatically. limit: 600 characters Leave this field blank Sign up to our newsletter Name Africa Check values your trust and is committed to the responsible management, use and protection of personal information. See our privacy policy. Leave this field blank Spot Checks View All false Nigeria Trump USAid funding No, Trump cut USAid funding to Nigeria – and elsewhere – because of US interests, not because of corrupt Nigerian politicians false South Africa HIV HIV/AIDS United States funding government false claim No, 100% of South Africa’s HIV/Aids funding does not come from the United States – mostly funded by the South African government Nigeria budget debt policing Osita Chidoka aviation minister Fact-checking former minister Osita Chidoka's claims on Nigeria's 2025 budget, debt and policing We hold public figures accountable For democracy to function, public figures need to be held to account for what they say. The claims they make need to be checked, openly and impartially. Africa Check is an independent, non-partisan organisation which assesses claims made in the public arena using journalistic skills and evidence drawn from the latest online tools, readers, public sources and experts, sorting fact from fiction and publishing the results. Browse by category Health Covid-19 Education Crime Economy Kenya Nigeria Senegal South Africa Sign up to our newsletter Name Africa Check values your trust and is committed to the responsible management, use and protection of personal information. See our privacy policy. Leave this field blank Follow us Facebook Twitter Instagram TikTok Footer About Partner With Us Terms and Conditions Contact Us Sitemap Want to keep reading our fact-checks? We will never charge you for verified, reliable information. Help us keep it that way by supporting our work. Become a newsletter subscriber Name Africa Check values your trust and is committed to the responsible management, use and protection of personal information. See our privacy policy. Leave this field blank Support independent fact-checking in Africa. See our donation optionsFactchecking Kenya’s chief justice on judiciary funding and backlog of cases - Africa Check Skip to main content English Français Main navigation Fact-checks Reports Factsheets Guides Spot Checks Blog Meta programme fact-checks Republish our work Who we are Our team Our impact How we are funded Partners Get in touch What we do Info Finder African Fact-Checking Awards Corrections Fact-checking research Training Media Literacy Educator knowledge hub How we fact-check Corrections policy Code of principles How we rate claims Get Involved Donate Submit a claim to fact-check Partner with us Join our team Fact-checking tips Quizzes Donate Back to Africa Check Factchecking Kenya’s chief justice on judiciary funding and backlog of cases Published on 17 September 2020 Claim Six claims about the Kenyan judiciary, from its budget and number of cases to how many judges and magistrates serve Kenya’s population. Verdict Four correct, one understated and one unproven Source Kenya’s chief justice, David Maraga (August 2020) This article is more than 4 years old Maraga was largely correct about the judiciary budget and how many Kenyans are served per judge and magistrate in the country. The chief justice was also correct that the number of cases filed in Kenyan courts every year exceeds the number of cases the judiciary settles by as much as 100,000, causing an ever-growing backlog. But there isn’t evidence of a global average for comparing the number of judges and magistrates per population – there are too many variables in different legal systems. To mark the tenth anniversary of Kenya’s constitution , broadcaster NTV interviewed current and former government officials on how the law has been applied. Chief justice David Maraga told NTV that while the 2010 constitution had sought to strengthen the judiciary’s independence, funding was a perennial headache. “[Budget cuts] hit the judiciary sometimes to a point that its operations grind to a halt,” Maraga said in the interview , published in August 2020. In recent months the chief justice has been vocal on how cuts have hampered the delivery of judicial services. In his interview, Maraga made several claims. We looked into their accuracy. Claim The judiciary does not even get 1% of the national budget Verdict correct Maraga, who assumed office in 2016, asked for more funding as “the judiciary does not even get 1% of the national budget”. “We have said, over and over again, that for the judiciary to operate properly we should get at least 2.5% of the national budget,” he said . Africa Check has previously found there isn’t a “recommended global percentage” of funding for the judiciary from the national budget. In 2018 Maraga also claimed it was 2.5%. To determine how much has been allocated to the judiciary in recent years we consulted the appropriation acts, the laws that show budget allocations to government departments. For the national budget, we checked budget statements. Judiciary amounts as share of Kenya budget Year Judiciary budget (KSh billion) National budget (KSh trillion) Share 2014/15 17.5 1.58 1.1% 2015/16 16.7 2 0.8% 2016/17 17.3 2.3 0.8% 2017/18 17.6 2.3 0.8% 2018/19 14.5 2.6 0.6% 2019/20 18.9 2.8 0.7% 2020/21 17.4 2.8 0.6% Sources: Budget speeches for 2020 , 2019 , 2018 , 2017 , 2016 , 2015 and 2014 and Appropriations Acts for 2020, 2019 , 2018 , 2017 , 2016 , 2015 and 2014 . Note: The figures shown have been rounded up. Only once in the last seven financial years, in 2014/15, did the judiciary receive more than 1% of the national budget. We therefore rate this claim as correct. Claim We have an average of 400,000 cases being filed in our courts every year Verdict correct The most recent state of the judiciary report covers the 2018/19 financial year. Released in January 2020, it shows that more than two million cases were lodged in all courts between 2014/15 and 2018/19. The report said : “The number of filed cases provides quantitative information on the extent of demand for court services by the public.” Total number of cases filed in the judiciary Financial year Cases 2014/15 334,685 2015/16 460,961 2016/17 344,180 2017/18 402,243 2018/19 484,349 Average 405,283 The average number of cases filed in the period covered by the report works out to 405,283 a year. We therefore rate this claim as correct. Claim We only dispose of about 300,000 cases Verdict correct Discussing the country’s case backlog, Maraga said the judiciary settles about 300,000 cases every year. This number was determined by the number of judges and magistrates and would only continue to pile up. “Unless the judiciary is given enough resources to have enough manpower, Kenyans will continue crying about delayed cases,” he said . The most recent state of the judiciary report has data covering 2014/15 to 2018/19. It shows an average of 321,652 cases settled across the five financial years. As of 2018/19 there were 153 judges and 546 magistrates in Kenya. Number of cases resolved by the judiciary Financial year Cases 2014/15 272,605 2015/16 191,625 2016/17 304,182 2017/18 370,488 2018/19 469,359 Average 321,652 We therefore rate the claim as correct. Claim In Kenya now with a population of about 48 million, we have one judge serving over 300,000 people Verdict correct There are 47.6 million people in Kenya, according to 2019 census data. The most recent data from the judiciary shows there were 153 judges as of June 2019. This works out to one judge for every 311,000 people. We rate this claim as correct. Claim We have one magistrate serving over 77,000 people Verdict understated The most recent data from the judiciary shows there were 546 magistrates in Kenya as of June 2019. The state of the judiciary report was released in January 2020. Using a population of 47.6 million , this works out to one magistrate for every 87,114 people. The chief justice’s figure was off by over 10,000 but it was still “over 77,000” people per magistrate. We therefore rate it as understated. Claim There is a ‘global average’ for the number of judges and magistrates to number of people Verdict unproven A calculation for a “global average” can be achieved by directly comparing the number of judges and magistrates to the world population. But to account for population differences, rates (per 100,000 people) are widely used . ( Note: See box below for more context. ) The chief justice has in the past spoken of a “recommended global percentage” of funding for the judiciary. We have contacted the judiciary for the source of the "global average" cited by the chief justice and will update this report with their response. Wachira Maina is a constitutional lawyer in Kenya who has written about the progress of institutions, including the judiciary, following the adoption of the 2010 constitution. He directed us to the UN Office of Drug and Crime (UNODC) for data on the administration of justice professionals against a country’s population. It shows there were 1.3 judges or magistrates for every 100,000 people in Kenya in 2014, 3.6 for South Africa in 2015, and 0.8 for the US and 8.7 for China in 2017. But the UNODC noted key weaknesses in the data when comparing countries. “The numbers reported are not restricted to judges deciding criminal cases,” it said. “The comparability problem might get even worse because some countries might still only report the number of judges whose duty is the judgment of criminal cases. “Apart from this, it is not clear whether really all judges are included in the reported figures in all countries.” Without a source for the chief justice’s claim of a global average, we can only rate this final claim as unproven. Is calculating the ratio of judges and magistrates to the population useful? The ratio of judges and magistrates to the population is useful depending on what you’re using it to show, Wachira Maina , a constitutional lawyer in Kenya told Africa Check. He gave an example of using the ratio of the number of doctors to the population as a metric for access to health, and of police officers to measure access to security services. However, he said, ratio data leaves a lot unstated, such as the distribution by region and by urban and rural areas. Therefore “to determine access to services, you will almost certainly need additional information”. “A high ratio by itself does not prove that most people have access to services, merely that if services were equitably distributed, and they rarely are, more people would have access,” Maina said. “Keep in mind though that you cannot increase access unless you have the numbers, so the ratio does still say something useful.” Chris Kerkering is a litigation manager at Katiba Institute , an organisation in Nairobi that promotes the knowledge of Kenya’s constitution. He told Africa Check that population does not automatically equate to a judge’s caseload. A very litigious society would have more cases per population, he said. Caseload and caseload weighting, which Kerkering described as not only counting the number of cases but also being able to determine how much time each respective case would take , may be the best way to determine whether a judiciary has the appropriate number of judges. But since doing a comparison between different countries with different legal systems and different cultures would be near impossible, “judges per population is a decent aggregate”, Kerkering said. He said the chief justice’s focus was on access to justice. “If there are not enough judges and the staff that support them then they are unable to provide the services that the judiciary requires. Case backlogs become one of the more obvious problems. Fewer judges mean that each judge is taking more cases.” “The more cases a judge has, the more time it takes to get through them. Access to justice requires timely decisions. The phrase ‘justice delayed is justice denied,’ is so commonly used for a reason. Often, as a case winds its way through the court system, avoidable delays result in long term harm.” “A judiciary that can’t get through its caseload promptly can’t ensure access to justice as required by the constitution.” Carlos Mureithi is a journalist based in Nairobi, Kenya Further reading: https://africacheck.org/reports/budget-cuts-hit-kenyas-judiciary-but-theres-no-global-funding-target/ Republish our content for free We believe that everyone needs the facts. You can republish the text of this article free of charge, both online and in print. However, we ask that you pay attention to these simple guidelines . In a nutshell: 1. Do not include images, as in most cases we do not own the copyright. 2. Please do not edit the article. 3. Make sure you credit "Africa Check" in the byline and don't forget to mention that the article was originally published on africacheck.org . Name Surname Email Leave this field blank Carlos Mureithi Claim Six claims about the Kenyan judiciary, from its budget and number of cases to how many judges and magistrates serve Kenya’s population. Verdict Four correct, one understated and one unproven Source Kenya’s chief justice, David Maraga (August 2020) Join us on WhatsApp Further Reading false Nigeria Trump USAid funding No, Trump cut USAid funding to Nigeria – and elsewhere – because of US interests, not because of corrupt Nigerian politicians false South Africa HIV HIV/AIDS United States funding government false claim No, 100% of South Africa’s HIV/Aids funding does not come from the United States – mostly funded by the South African government Nigeria budget debt policing Osita Chidoka aviation minister Fact-checking former minister Osita Chidoka's claims on Nigeria's 2025 budget, debt and policing Add new comment Your name Comment About text formats Restricted HTML Allowed HTML tags: <a href hreflang> <em> <strong> <cite> <blockquote cite> <code> <ul type> <ol start type> <li> <dl> <dt> <dd> <h2 id> <h3 id> <h4 id> <h5 id> <h6 id> Lines and paragraphs break automatically. Web page addresses and email addresses turn into links automatically. limit: 600 characters Leave this field blank Sign up to our newsletter Name Africa Check values your trust and is committed to the responsible management, use and protection of personal information. See our privacy policy. Leave this field blank Spot Checks View All false Nigeria Trump USAid funding No, Trump cut USAid funding to Nigeria – and elsewhere – because of US interests, not because of corrupt Nigerian politicians false South Africa HIV HIV/AIDS United States funding government false claim No, 100% of South Africa’s HIV/Aids funding does not come from the United States – mostly funded by the South African government Nigeria budget debt policing Osita Chidoka aviation minister Fact-checking former minister Osita Chidoka's claims on Nigeria's 2025 budget, debt and policing We hold public figures accountable For democracy to function, public figures need to be held to account for what they say. The claims they make need to be checked, openly and impartially. Africa Check is an independent, non-partisan organisation which assesses claims made in the public arena using journalistic skills and evidence drawn from the latest online tools, readers, public sources and experts, sorting fact from fiction and publishing the results. Browse by category Health Covid-19 Education Crime Economy Kenya Nigeria Senegal South Africa Sign up to our newsletter Name Africa Check values your trust and is committed to the responsible management, use and protection of personal information. See our privacy policy. Leave this field blank Follow us Facebook Twitter Instagram TikTok Footer About Partner With Us Terms and Conditions Contact Us Sitemap Want to keep reading our fact-checks? We will never charge you for verified, reliable information. Help us keep it that way by supporting our work. Become a newsletter subscriber Name Africa Check values your trust and is committed to the responsible management, use and protection of personal information. See our privacy policy. Leave this field blank Support independent fact-checking in Africa. See our donation optionsFactchecking Kenya’s chief justice on judiciary funding and backlog of cases - Africa Check Skip to main content English Français Main navigation Fact-checks Reports Factsheets Guides Spot Checks Blog Meta programme fact-checks Republish our work Who we are Our team Our impact How we are funded Partners Get in touch What we do Info Finder African Fact-Checking Awards Corrections Fact-checking research Training Media Literacy Educator knowledge hub How we fact-check Corrections policy Code of principles How we rate claims Get Involved Donate Submit a claim to fact-check Partner with us Join our team Fact-checking tips Quizzes Donate Back to Africa Check Factchecking Kenya’s chief justice on judiciary funding and backlog of cases Published on 17 September 2020 Claim Six claims about the Kenyan judiciary, from its budget and number of cases to how many judges and magistrates serve Kenya’s population. Verdict Four correct, one understated and one unproven Source Kenya’s chief justice, David Maraga (August 2020) This article is more than 4 years old Maraga was largely correct about the judiciary budget and how many Kenyans are served per judge and magistrate in the country. The chief justice was also correct that the number of cases filed in Kenyan courts every year exceeds the number of cases the judiciary settles by as much as 100,000, causing an ever-growing backlog. But there isn’t evidence of a global average for comparing the number of judges and magistrates per population – there are too many variables in different legal systems. To mark the tenth anniversary of Kenya’s constitution , broadcaster NTV interviewed current and former government officials on how the law has been applied. Chief justice David Maraga told NTV that while the 2010 constitution had sought to strengthen the judiciary’s independence, funding was a perennial headache. “[Budget cuts] hit the judiciary sometimes to a point that its operations grind to a halt,” Maraga said in the interview , published in August 2020. In recent months the chief justice has been vocal on how cuts have hampered the delivery of judicial services. In his interview, Maraga made several claims. We looked into their accuracy. Claim The judiciary does not even get 1% of the national budget Verdict correct Maraga, who assumed office in 2016, asked for more funding as “the judiciary does not even get 1% of the national budget”. “We have said, over and over again, that for the judiciary to operate properly we should get at least 2.5% of the national budget,” he said . Africa Check has previously found there isn’t a “recommended global percentage” of funding for the judiciary from the national budget. In 2018 Maraga also claimed it was 2.5%. To determine how much has been allocated to the judiciary in recent years we consulted the appropriation acts, the laws that show budget allocations to government departments. For the national budget, we checked budget statements. Judiciary amounts as share of Kenya budget Year Judiciary budget (KSh billion) National budget (KSh trillion) Share 2014/15 17.5 1.58 1.1% 2015/16 16.7 2 0.8% 2016/17 17.3 2.3 0.8% 2017/18 17.6 2.3 0.8% 2018/19 14.5 2.6 0.6% 2019/20 18.9 2.8 0.7% 2020/21 17.4 2.8 0.6% Sources: Budget speeches for 2020 , 2019 , 2018 , 2017 , 2016 , 2015 and 2014 and Appropriations Acts for 2020, 2019 , 2018 , 2017 , 2016 , 2015 and 2014 . Note: The figures shown have been rounded up. Only once in the last seven financial years, in 2014/15, did the judiciary receive more than 1% of the national budget. We therefore rate this claim as correct. Claim We have an average of 400,000 cases being filed in our courts every year Verdict correct The most recent state of the judiciary report covers the 2018/19 financial year. Released in January 2020, it shows that more than two million cases were lodged in all courts between 2014/15 and 2018/19. The report said : “The number of filed cases provides quantitative information on the extent of demand for court services by the public.” Total number of cases filed in the judiciary Financial year Cases 2014/15 334,685 2015/16 460,961 2016/17 344,180 2017/18 402,243 2018/19 484,349 Average 405,283 The average number of cases filed in the period covered by the report works out to 405,283 a year. We therefore rate this claim as correct. Claim We only dispose of about 300,000 cases Verdict correct Discussing the country’s case backlog, Maraga said the judiciary settles about 300,000 cases every year. This number was determined by the number of judges and magistrates and would only continue to pile up. “Unless the judiciary is given enough resources to have enough manpower, Kenyans will continue crying about delayed cases,” he said . The most recent state of the judiciary report has data covering 2014/15 to 2018/19. It shows an average of 321,652 cases settled across the five financial years. As of 2018/19 there were 153 judges and 546 magistrates in Kenya. Number of cases resolved by the judiciary Financial year Cases 2014/15 272,605 2015/16 191,625 2016/17 304,182 2017/18 370,488 2018/19 469,359 Average 321,652 We therefore rate the claim as correct. Claim In Kenya now with a population of about 48 million, we have one judge serving over 300,000 people Verdict correct There are 47.6 million people in Kenya, according to 2019 census data. The most recent data from the judiciary shows there were 153 judges as of June 2019. This works out to one judge for every 311,000 people. We rate this claim as correct. Claim We have one magistrate serving over 77,000 people Verdict understated The most recent data from the judiciary shows there were 546 magistrates in Kenya as of June 2019. The state of the judiciary report was released in January 2020. Using a population of 47.6 million , this works out to one magistrate for every 87,114 people. The chief justice’s figure was off by over 10,000 but it was still “over 77,000” people per magistrate. We therefore rate it as understated. Claim There is a ‘global average’ for the number of judges and magistrates to number of people Verdict unproven A calculation for a “global average” can be achieved by directly comparing the number of judges and magistrates to the world population. But to account for population differences, rates (per 100,000 people) are widely used . ( Note: See box below for more context. ) The chief justice has in the past spoken of a “recommended global percentage” of funding for the judiciary. We have contacted the judiciary for the source of the "global average" cited by the chief justice and will update this report with their response. Wachira Maina is a constitutional lawyer in Kenya who has written about the progress of institutions, including the judiciary, following the adoption of the 2010 constitution. He directed us to the UN Office of Drug and Crime (UNODC) for data on the administration of justice professionals against a country’s population. It shows there were 1.3 judges or magistrates for every 100,000 people in Kenya in 2014, 3.6 for South Africa in 2015, and 0.8 for the US and 8.7 for China in 2017. But the UNODC noted key weaknesses in the data when comparing countries. “The numbers reported are not restricted to judges deciding criminal cases,” it said. “The comparability problem might get even worse because some countries might still only report the number of judges whose duty is the judgment of criminal cases. “Apart from this, it is not clear whether really all judges are included in the reported figures in all countries.” Without a source for the chief justice’s claim of a global average, we can only rate this final claim as unproven. Is calculating the ratio of judges and magistrates to the population useful? The ratio of judges and magistrates to the population is useful depending on what you’re using it to show, Wachira Maina , a constitutional lawyer in Kenya told Africa Check. He gave an example of using the ratio of the number of doctors to the population as a metric for access to health, and of police officers to measure access to security services. However, he said, ratio data leaves a lot unstated, such as the distribution by region and by urban and rural areas. Therefore “to determine access to services, you will almost certainly need additional information”. “A high ratio by itself does not prove that most people have access to services, merely that if services were equitably distributed, and they rarely are, more people would have access,” Maina said. “Keep in mind though that you cannot increase access unless you have the numbers, so the ratio does still say something useful.” Chris Kerkering is a litigation manager at Katiba Institute , an organisation in Nairobi that promotes the knowledge of Kenya’s constitution. He told Africa Check that population does not automatically equate to a judge’s caseload. A very litigious society would have more cases per population, he said. Caseload and caseload weighting, which Kerkering described as not only counting the number of cases but also being able to determine how much time each respective case would take , may be the best way to determine whether a judiciary has the appropriate number of judges. But since doing a comparison between different countries with different legal systems and different cultures would be near impossible, “judges per population is a decent aggregate”, Kerkering said. He said the chief justice’s focus was on access to justice. “If there are not enough judges and the staff that support them then they are unable to provide the services that the judiciary requires. Case backlogs become one of the more obvious problems. Fewer judges mean that each judge is taking more cases.” “The more cases a judge has, the more time it takes to get through them. Access to justice requires timely decisions. The phrase ‘justice delayed is justice denied,’ is so commonly used for a reason. Often, as a case winds its way through the court system, avoidable delays result in long term harm.” “A judiciary that can’t get through its caseload promptly can’t ensure access to justice as required by the constitution.” Carlos Mureithi is a journalist based in Nairobi, Kenya Further reading: https://africacheck.org/reports/budget-cuts-hit-kenyas-judiciary-but-theres-no-global-funding-target/ Republish our content for free We believe that everyone needs the facts. You can republish the text of this article free of charge, both online and in print. However, we ask that you pay attention to these simple guidelines . In a nutshell: 1. Do not include images, as in most cases we do not own the copyright. 2. Please do not edit the article. 3. Make sure you credit "Africa Check" in the byline and don't forget to mention that the article was originally published on africacheck.org . Name Surname Email Leave this field blank Carlos Mureithi Claim Six claims about the Kenyan judiciary, from its budget and number of cases to how many judges and magistrates serve Kenya’s population. Verdict Four correct, one understated and one unproven Source Kenya’s chief justice, David Maraga (August 2020) Join us on WhatsApp Further Reading false Nigeria Trump USAid funding No, Trump cut USAid funding to Nigeria – and elsewhere – because of US interests, not because of corrupt Nigerian politicians false South Africa HIV HIV/AIDS United States funding government false claim No, 100% of South Africa’s HIV/Aids funding does not come from the United States – mostly funded by the South African government Nigeria budget debt policing Osita Chidoka aviation minister Fact-checking former minister Osita Chidoka's claims on Nigeria's 2025 budget, debt and policing Add new comment Your name Comment About text formats Restricted HTML Allowed HTML tags: <a href hreflang> <em> <strong> <cite> <blockquote cite> <code> <ul type> <ol start type> <li> <dl> <dt> <dd> <h2 id> <h3 id> <h4 id> <h5 id> <h6 id> Lines and paragraphs break automatically. Web page addresses and email addresses turn into links automatically. limit: 600 characters Leave this field blank Sign up to our newsletter Name Africa Check values your trust and is committed to the responsible management, use and protection of personal information. See our privacy policy. Leave this field blank Spot Checks View All false Nigeria Trump USAid funding No, Trump cut USAid funding to Nigeria – and elsewhere – because of US interests, not because of corrupt Nigerian politicians false South Africa HIV HIV/AIDS United States funding government false claim No, 100% of South Africa’s HIV/Aids funding does not come from the United States – mostly funded by the South African government Nigeria budget debt policing Osita Chidoka aviation minister Fact-checking former minister Osita Chidoka's claims on Nigeria's 2025 budget, debt and policing We hold public figures accountable For democracy to function, public figures need to be held to account for what they say. The claims they make need to be checked, openly and impartially. Africa Check is an independent, non-partisan organisation which assesses claims made in the public arena using journalistic skills and evidence drawn from the latest online tools, readers, public sources and experts, sorting fact from fiction and publishing the results. Browse by category Health Covid-19 Education Crime Economy Kenya Nigeria Senegal South Africa Sign up to our newsletter Name Africa Check values your trust and is committed to the responsible management, use and protection of personal information. See our privacy policy. Leave this field blank Follow us Facebook Twitter Instagram TikTok Footer About Partner With Us Terms and Conditions Contact Us Sitemap Want to keep reading our fact-checks? We will never charge you for verified, reliable information. Help us keep it that way by supporting our work. Become a newsletter subscriber Name Africa Check values your trust and is committed to the responsible management, use and protection of personal information. See our privacy policy. Leave this field blank Support independent fact-checking in Africa. See our donation optionsFactchecking Kenya’s chief justice on judiciary funding and backlog of cases - Africa Check Skip to main content English Français Main navigation Fact-checks Reports Factsheets Guides Spot Checks Blog Meta programme fact-checks Republish our work Who we are Our team Our impact How we are funded Partners Get in touch What we do Info Finder African Fact-Checking Awards Corrections Fact-checking research Training Media Literacy Educator knowledge hub How we fact-check Corrections policy Code of principles How we rate claims Get Involved Donate Submit a claim to fact-check Partner with us Join our team Fact-checking tips Quizzes Donate Back to Africa Check Factchecking Kenya’s chief justice on judiciary funding and backlog of cases Published on 17 September 2020 Claim Six claims about the Kenyan judiciary, from its budget and number of cases to how many judges and magistrates serve Kenya’s population. Verdict Four correct, one understated and one unproven Source Kenya’s chief justice, David Maraga (August 2020) This article is more than 4 years old Maraga was largely correct about the judiciary budget and how many Kenyans are served per judge and magistrate in the country. The chief justice was also correct that the number of cases filed in Kenyan courts every year exceeds the number of cases the judiciary settles by as much as 100,000, causing an ever-growing backlog. But there isn’t evidence of a global average for comparing the number of judges and magistrates per population – there are too many variables in different legal systems. To mark the tenth anniversary of Kenya’s constitution , broadcaster NTV interviewed current and former government officials on how the law has been applied. Chief justice David Maraga told NTV that while the 2010 constitution had sought to strengthen the judiciary’s independence, funding was a perennial headache. “[Budget cuts] hit the judiciary sometimes to a point that its operations grind to a halt,” Maraga said in the interview , published in August 2020. In recent months the chief justice has been vocal on how cuts have hampered the delivery of judicial services. In his interview, Maraga made several claims. We looked into their accuracy. Claim The judiciary does not even get 1% of the national budget Verdict correct Maraga, who assumed office in 2016, asked for more funding as “the judiciary does not even get 1% of the national budget”. “We have said, over and over again, that for the judiciary to operate properly we should get at least 2.5% of the national budget,” he said . Africa Check has previously found there isn’t a “recommended global percentage” of funding for the judiciary from the national budget. In 2018 Maraga also claimed it was 2.5%. To determine how much has been allocated to the judiciary in recent years we consulted the appropriation acts, the laws that show budget allocations to government departments. For the national budget, we checked budget statements. Judiciary amounts as share of Kenya budget Year Judiciary budget (KSh billion) National budget (KSh trillion) Share 2014/15 17.5 1.58 1.1% 2015/16 16.7 2 0.8% 2016/17 17.3 2.3 0.8% 2017/18 17.6 2.3 0.8% 2018/19 14.5 2.6 0.6% 2019/20 18.9 2.8 0.7% 2020/21 17.4 2.8 0.6% Sources: Budget speeches for 2020 , 2019 , 2018 , 2017 , 2016 , 2015 and 2014 and Appropriations Acts for 2020, 2019 , 2018 , 2017 , 2016 , 2015 and 2014 . Note: The figures shown have been rounded up. Only once in the last seven financial years, in 2014/15, did the judiciary receive more than 1% of the national budget. We therefore rate this claim as correct. Claim We have an average of 400,000 cases being filed in our courts every year Verdict correct The most recent state of the judiciary report covers the 2018/19 financial year. Released in January 2020, it shows that more than two million cases were lodged in all courts between 2014/15 and 2018/19. The report said : “The number of filed cases provides quantitative information on the extent of demand for court services by the public.” Total number of cases filed in the judiciary Financial year Cases 2014/15 334,685 2015/16 460,961 2016/17 344,180 2017/18 402,243 2018/19 484,349 Average 405,283 The average number of cases filed in the period covered by the report works out to 405,283 a year. We therefore rate this claim as correct. Claim We only dispose of about 300,000 cases Verdict correct Discussing the country’s case backlog, Maraga said the judiciary settles about 300,000 cases every year. This number was determined by the number of judges and magistrates and would only continue to pile up. “Unless the judiciary is given enough resources to have enough manpower, Kenyans will continue crying about delayed cases,” he said . The most recent state of the judiciary report has data covering 2014/15 to 2018/19. It shows an average of 321,652 cases settled across the five financial years. As of 2018/19 there were 153 judges and 546 magistrates in Kenya. Number of cases resolved by the judiciary Financial year Cases 2014/15 272,605 2015/16 191,625 2016/17 304,182 2017/18 370,488 2018/19 469,359 Average 321,652 We therefore rate the claim as correct. Claim In Kenya now with a population of about 48 million, we have one judge serving over 300,000 people Verdict correct There are 47.6 million people in Kenya, according to 2019 census data. The most recent data from the judiciary shows there were 153 judges as of June 2019. This works out to one judge for every 311,000 people. We rate this claim as correct. Claim We have one magistrate serving over 77,000 people Verdict understated The most recent data from the judiciary shows there were 546 magistrates in Kenya as of June 2019. The state of the judiciary report was released in January 2020. Using a population of 47.6 million , this works out to one magistrate for every 87,114 people. The chief justice’s figure was off by over 10,000 but it was still “over 77,000” people per magistrate. We therefore rate it as understated. Claim There is a ‘global average’ for the number of judges and magistrates to number of people Verdict unproven A calculation for a “global average” can be achieved by directly comparing the number of judges and magistrates to the world population. But to account for population differences, rates (per 100,000 people) are widely used . ( Note: See box below for more context. ) The chief justice has in the past spoken of a “recommended global percentage” of funding for the judiciary. We have contacted the judiciary for the source of the "global average" cited by the chief justice and will update this report with their response. Wachira Maina is a constitutional lawyer in Kenya who has written about the progress of institutions, including the judiciary, following the adoption of the 2010 constitution. He directed us to the UN Office of Drug and Crime (UNODC) for data on the administration of justice professionals against a country’s population. It shows there were 1.3 judges or magistrates for every 100,000 people in Kenya in 2014, 3.6 for South Africa in 2015, and 0.8 for the US and 8.7 for China in 2017. But the UNODC noted key weaknesses in the data when comparing countries. “The numbers reported are not restricted to judges deciding criminal cases,” it said. “The comparability problem might get even worse because some countries might still only report the number of judges whose duty is the judgment of criminal cases. “Apart from this, it is not clear whether really all judges are included in the reported figures in all countries.” Without a source for the chief justice’s claim of a global average, we can only rate this final claim as unproven. Is calculating the ratio of judges and magistrates to the population useful? The ratio of judges and magistrates to the population is useful depending on what you’re using it to show, Wachira Maina , a constitutional lawyer in Kenya told Africa Check. He gave an example of using the ratio of the number of doctors to the population as a metric for access to health, and of police officers to measure access to security services. However, he said, ratio data leaves a lot unstated, such as the distribution by region and by urban and rural areas. Therefore “to determine access to services, you will almost certainly need additional information”. “A high ratio by itself does not prove that most people have access to services, merely that if services were equitably distributed, and they rarely are, more people would have access,” Maina said. “Keep in mind though that you cannot increase access unless you have the numbers, so the ratio does still say something useful.” Chris Kerkering is a litigation manager at Katiba Institute , an organisation in Nairobi that promotes the knowledge of Kenya’s constitution. He told Africa Check that population does not automatically equate to a judge’s caseload. A very litigious society would have more cases per population, he said. Caseload and caseload weighting, which Kerkering described as not only counting the number of cases but also being able to determine how much time each respective case would take , may be the best way to determine whether a judiciary has the appropriate number of judges. But since doing a comparison between different countries with different legal systems and different cultures would be near impossible, “judges per population is a decent aggregate”, Kerkering said. He said the chief justice’s focus was on access to justice. “If there are not enough judges and the staff that support them then they are unable to provide the services that the judiciary requires. Case backlogs become one of the more obvious problems. Fewer judges mean that each judge is taking more cases.” “The more cases a judge has, the more time it takes to get through them. Access to justice requires timely decisions. The phrase ‘justice delayed is justice denied,’ is so commonly used for a reason. Often, as a case winds its way through the court system, avoidable delays result in long term harm.” “A judiciary that can’t get through its caseload promptly can’t ensure access to justice as required by the constitution.” Carlos Mureithi is a journalist based in Nairobi, Kenya Further reading: https://africacheck.org/reports/budget-cuts-hit-kenyas-judiciary-but-theres-no-global-funding-target/ Republish our content for free We believe that everyone needs the facts. You can republish the text of this article free of charge, both online and in print. However, we ask that you pay attention to these simple guidelines . In a nutshell: 1. Do not include images, as in most cases we do not own the copyright. 2. Please do not edit the article. 3. Make sure you credit "Africa Check" in the byline and don't forget to mention that the article was originally published on africacheck.org . Name Surname Email Leave this field blank Carlos Mureithi Claim Six claims about the Kenyan judiciary, from its budget and number of cases to how many judges and magistrates serve Kenya’s population. Verdict Four correct, one understated and one unproven Source Kenya’s chief justice, David Maraga (August 2020) Join us on WhatsApp Further Reading false Nigeria Trump USAid funding No, Trump cut USAid funding to Nigeria – and elsewhere – because of US interests, not because of corrupt Nigerian politicians false South Africa HIV HIV/AIDS United States funding government false claim No, 100% of South Africa’s HIV/Aids funding does not come from the United States – mostly funded by the South African government Nigeria budget debt policing Osita Chidoka aviation minister Fact-checking former minister Osita Chidoka's claims on Nigeria's 2025 budget, debt and policing Add new comment Your name Comment About text formats Restricted HTML Allowed HTML tags: <a href hreflang> <em> <strong> <cite> <blockquote cite> <code> <ul type> <ol start type> <li> <dl> <dt> <dd> <h2 id> <h3 id> <h4 id> <h5 id> <h6 id> Lines and paragraphs break automatically. Web page addresses and email addresses turn into links automatically. limit: 600 characters Leave this field blank Sign up to our newsletter Name Africa Check values your trust and is committed to the responsible management, use and protection of personal information. See our privacy policy. Leave this field blank Spot Checks View All false Nigeria Trump USAid funding No, Trump cut USAid funding to Nigeria – and elsewhere – because of US interests, not because of corrupt Nigerian politicians false South Africa HIV HIV/AIDS United States funding government false claim No, 100% of South Africa’s HIV/Aids funding does not come from the United States – mostly funded by the South African government Nigeria budget debt policing Osita Chidoka aviation minister Fact-checking former minister Osita Chidoka's claims on Nigeria's 2025 budget, debt and policing We hold public figures accountable For democracy to function, public figures need to be held to account for what they say. The claims they make need to be checked, openly and impartially. Africa Check is an independent, non-partisan organisation which assesses claims made in the public arena using journalistic skills and evidence drawn from the latest online tools, readers, public sources and experts, sorting fact from fiction and publishing the results. Browse by category Health Covid-19 Education Crime Economy Kenya Nigeria Senegal South Africa Sign up to our newsletter Name Africa Check values your trust and is committed to the responsible management, use and protection of personal information. See our privacy policy. Leave this field blank Follow us Facebook Twitter Instagram TikTok Footer About Partner With Us Terms and Conditions Contact Us Sitemap Want to keep reading our fact-checks? We will never charge you for verified, reliable information. Help us keep it that way by supporting our work. Become a newsletter subscriber Name Africa Check values your trust and is committed to the responsible management, use and protection of personal information. See our privacy policy. Leave this field blank Support independent fact-checking in Africa. See our donation optionsFactchecking Kenya’s chief justice on judiciary funding and backlog of cases - Africa Check Skip to main content English Français Main navigation Fact-checks Reports Factsheets Guides Spot Checks Blog Meta programme fact-checks Republish our work Who we are Our team Our impact How we are funded Partners Get in touch What we do Info Finder African Fact-Checking Awards Corrections Fact-checking research Training Media Literacy Educator knowledge hub How we fact-check Corrections policy Code of principles How we rate claims Get Involved Donate Submit a claim to fact-check Partner with us Join our team Fact-checking tips Quizzes Donate Back to Africa Check Factchecking Kenya’s chief justice on judiciary funding and backlog of cases Published on 17 September 2020 Claim Six claims about the Kenyan judiciary, from its budget and number of cases to how many judges and magistrates serve Kenya’s population. Verdict Four correct, one understated and one unproven Source Kenya’s chief justice, David Maraga (August 2020) This article is more than 4 years old Maraga was largely correct about the judiciary budget and how many Kenyans are served per judge and magistrate in the country. The chief justice was also correct that the number of cases filed in Kenyan courts every year exceeds the number of cases the judiciary settles by as much as 100,000, causing an ever-growing backlog. But there isn’t evidence of a global average for comparing the number of judges and magistrates per population – there are too many variables in different legal systems. To mark the tenth anniversary of Kenya’s constitution , broadcaster NTV interviewed current and former government officials on how the law has been applied. Chief justice David Maraga told NTV that while the 2010 constitution had sought to strengthen the judiciary’s independence, funding was a perennial headache. “[Budget cuts] hit the judiciary sometimes to a point that its operations grind to a halt,” Maraga said in the interview , published in August 2020. In recent months the chief justice has been vocal on how cuts have hampered the delivery of judicial services. In his interview, Maraga made several claims. We looked into their accuracy. Claim The judiciary does not even get 1% of the national budget Verdict correct Maraga, who assumed office in 2016, asked for more funding as “the judiciary does not even get 1% of the national budget”. “We have said, over and over again, that for the judiciary to operate properly we should get at least 2.5% of the national budget,” he said . Africa Check has previously found there isn’t a “recommended global percentage” of funding for the judiciary from the national budget. In 2018 Maraga also claimed it was 2.5%. To determine how much has been allocated to the judiciary in recent years we consulted the appropriation acts, the laws that show budget allocations to government departments. For the national budget, we checked budget statements. Judiciary amounts as share of Kenya budget Year Judiciary budget (KSh billion) National budget (KSh trillion) Share 2014/15 17.5 1.58 1.1% 2015/16 16.7 2 0.8% 2016/17 17.3 2.3 0.8% 2017/18 17.6 2.3 0.8% 2018/19 14.5 2.6 0.6% 2019/20 18.9 2.8 0.7% 2020/21 17.4 2.8 0.6% Sources: Budget speeches for 2020 , 2019 , 2018 , 2017 , 2016 , 2015 and 2014 and Appropriations Acts for 2020, 2019 , 2018 , 2017 , 2016 , 2015 and 2014 . Note: The figures shown have been rounded up. Only once in the last seven financial years, in 2014/15, did the judiciary receive more than 1% of the national budget. We therefore rate this claim as correct. Claim We have an average of 400,000 cases being filed in our courts every year Verdict correct The most recent state of the judiciary report covers the 2018/19 financial year. Released in January 2020, it shows that more than two million cases were lodged in all courts between 2014/15 and 2018/19. The report said : “The number of filed cases provides quantitative information on the extent of demand for court services by the public.” Total number of cases filed in the judiciary Financial year Cases 2014/15 334,685 2015/16 460,961 2016/17 344,180 2017/18 402,243 2018/19 484,349 Average 405,283 The average number of cases filed in the period covered by the report works out to 405,283 a year. We therefore rate this claim as correct. Claim We only dispose of about 300,000 cases Verdict correct Discussing the country’s case backlog, Maraga said the judiciary settles about 300,000 cases every year. This number was determined by the number of judges and magistrates and would only continue to pile up. “Unless the judiciary is given enough resources to have enough manpower, Kenyans will continue crying about delayed cases,” he said . The most recent state of the judiciary report has data covering 2014/15 to 2018/19. It shows an average of 321,652 cases settled across the five financial years. As of 2018/19 there were 153 judges and 546 magistrates in Kenya. Number of cases resolved by the judiciary Financial year Cases 2014/15 272,605 2015/16 191,625 2016/17 304,182 2017/18 370,488 2018/19 469,359 Average 321,652 We therefore rate the claim as correct. Claim In Kenya now with a population of about 48 million, we have one judge serving over 300,000 people Verdict correct There are 47.6 million people in Kenya, according to 2019 census data. The most recent data from the judiciary shows there were 153 judges as of June 2019. This works out to one judge for every 311,000 people. We rate this claim as correct. Claim We have one magistrate serving over 77,000 people Verdict understated The most recent data from the judiciary shows there were 546 magistrates in Kenya as of June 2019. The state of the judiciary report was released in January 2020. Using a population of 47.6 million , this works out to one magistrate for every 87,114 people. The chief justice’s figure was off by over 10,000 but it was still “over 77,000” people per magistrate. We therefore rate it as understated. Claim There is a ‘global average’ for the number of judges and magistrates to number of people Verdict unproven A calculation for a “global average” can be achieved by directly comparing the number of judges and magistrates to the world population. But to account for population differences, rates (per 100,000 people) are widely used . ( Note: See box below for more context. ) The chief justice has in the past spoken of a “recommended global percentage” of funding for the judiciary. We have contacted the judiciary for the source of the "global average" cited by the chief justice and will update this report with their response. Wachira Maina is a constitutional lawyer in Kenya who has written about the progress of institutions, including the judiciary, following the adoption of the 2010 constitution. He directed us to the UN Office of Drug and Crime (UNODC) for data on the administration of justice professionals against a country’s population. It shows there were 1.3 judges or magistrates for every 100,000 people in Kenya in 2014, 3.6 for South Africa in 2015, and 0.8 for the US and 8.7 for China in 2017. But the UNODC noted key weaknesses in the data when comparing countries. “The numbers reported are not restricted to judges deciding criminal cases,” it said. “The comparability problem might get even worse because some countries might still only report the number of judges whose duty is the judgment of criminal cases. “Apart from this, it is not clear whether really all judges are included in the reported figures in all countries.” Without a source for the chief justice’s claim of a global average, we can only rate this final claim as unproven. Is calculating the ratio of judges and magistrates to the population useful? The ratio of judges and magistrates to the population is useful depending on what you’re using it to show, Wachira Maina , a constitutional lawyer in Kenya told Africa Check. He gave an example of using the ratio of the number of doctors to the population as a metric for access to health, and of police officers to measure access to security services. However, he said, ratio data leaves a lot unstated, such as the distribution by region and by urban and rural areas. Therefore “to determine access to services, you will almost certainly need additional information”. “A high ratio by itself does not prove that most people have access to services, merely that if services were equitably distributed, and they rarely are, more people would have access,” Maina said. “Keep in mind though that you cannot increase access unless you have the numbers, so the ratio does still say something useful.” Chris Kerkering is a litigation manager at Katiba Institute , an organisation in Nairobi that promotes the knowledge of Kenya’s constitution. He told Africa Check that population does not automatically equate to a judge’s caseload. A very litigious society would have more cases per population, he said. Caseload and caseload weighting, which Kerkering described as not only counting the number of cases but also being able to determine how much time each respective case would take , may be the best way to determine whether a judiciary has the appropriate number of judges. But since doing a comparison between different countries with different legal systems and different cultures would be near impossible, “judges per population is a decent aggregate”, Kerkering said. He said the chief justice’s focus was on access to justice. “If there are not enough judges and the staff that support them then they are unable to provide the services that the judiciary requires. Case backlogs become one of the more obvious problems. Fewer judges mean that each judge is taking more cases.” “The more cases a judge has, the more time it takes to get through them. Access to justice requires timely decisions. The phrase ‘justice delayed is justice denied,’ is so commonly used for a reason. Often, as a case winds its way through the court system, avoidable delays result in long term harm.” “A judiciary that can’t get through its caseload promptly can’t ensure access to justice as required by the constitution.” Carlos Mureithi is a journalist based in Nairobi, Kenya Further reading: https://africacheck.org/reports/budget-cuts-hit-kenyas-judiciary-but-theres-no-global-funding-target/ Republish our content for free We believe that everyone needs the facts. You can republish the text of this article free of charge, both online and in print. However, we ask that you pay attention to these simple guidelines . In a nutshell: 1. Do not include images, as in most cases we do not own the copyright. 2. Please do not edit the article. 3. Make sure you credit "Africa Check" in the byline and don't forget to mention that the article was originally published on africacheck.org . Name Surname Email Leave this field blank Carlos Mureithi Claim Six claims about the Kenyan judiciary, from its budget and number of cases to how many judges and magistrates serve Kenya’s population. Verdict Four correct, one understated and one unproven Source Kenya’s chief justice, David Maraga (August 2020) Join us on WhatsApp Further Reading false Nigeria Trump USAid funding No, Trump cut USAid funding to Nigeria – and elsewhere – because of US interests, not because of corrupt Nigerian politicians false South Africa HIV HIV/AIDS United States funding government false claim No, 100% of South Africa’s HIV/Aids funding does not come from the United States – mostly funded by the South African government Nigeria budget debt policing Osita Chidoka aviation minister Fact-checking former minister Osita Chidoka's claims on Nigeria's 2025 budget, debt and policing Add new comment Your name Comment About text formats Restricted HTML Allowed HTML tags: <a href hreflang> <em> <strong> <cite> <blockquote cite> <code> <ul type> <ol start type> <li> <dl> <dt> <dd> <h2 id> <h3 id> <h4 id> <h5 id> <h6 id> Lines and paragraphs break automatically. Web page addresses and email addresses turn into links automatically. limit: 600 characters Leave this field blank Sign up to our newsletter Name Africa Check values your trust and is committed to the responsible management, use and protection of personal information. See our privacy policy. Leave this field blank Spot Checks View All false Nigeria Trump USAid funding No, Trump cut USAid funding to Nigeria – and elsewhere – because of US interests, not because of corrupt Nigerian politicians false South Africa HIV HIV/AIDS United States funding government false claim No, 100% of South Africa’s HIV/Aids funding does not come from the United States – mostly funded by the South African government Nigeria budget debt policing Osita Chidoka aviation minister Fact-checking former minister Osita Chidoka's claims on Nigeria's 2025 budget, debt and policing We hold public figures accountable For democracy to function, public figures need to be held to account for what they say. The claims they make need to be checked, openly and impartially. Africa Check is an independent, non-partisan organisation which assesses claims made in the public arena using journalistic skills and evidence drawn from the latest online tools, readers, public sources and experts, sorting fact from fiction and publishing the results. Browse by category Health Covid-19 Education Crime Economy Kenya Nigeria Senegal South Africa Sign up to our newsletter Name Africa Check values your trust and is committed to the responsible management, use and protection of personal information. See our privacy policy. Leave this field blank Follow us Facebook Twitter Instagram TikTok Footer About Partner With Us Terms and Conditions Contact Us Sitemap Want to keep reading our fact-checks? We will never charge you for verified, reliable information. Help us keep it that way by supporting our work. Become a newsletter subscriber Name Africa Check values your trust and is committed to the responsible management, use and protection of personal information. See our privacy policy. Leave this field blank Support independent fact-checking in Africa. See our donation optionsFactchecking Kenya’s chief justice on judiciary funding and backlog of cases - Africa Check Skip to main content English Français Main navigation Fact-checks Reports Factsheets Guides Spot Checks Blog Meta programme fact-checks Republish our work Who we are Our team Our impact How we are funded Partners Get in touch What we do Info Finder African Fact-Checking Awards Corrections Fact-checking research Training Media Literacy Educator knowledge hub How we fact-check Corrections policy Code of principles How we rate claims Get Involved Donate Submit a claim to fact-check Partner with us Join our team Fact-checking tips Quizzes Donate Back to Africa Check Factchecking Kenya’s chief justice on judiciary funding and backlog of cases Published on 17 September 2020 Claim Six claims about the Kenyan judiciary, from its budget and number of cases to how many judges and magistrates serve Kenya’s population. Verdict Four correct, one understated and one unproven Source Kenya’s chief justice, David Maraga (August 2020) This article is more than 4 years old Maraga was largely correct about the judiciary budget and how many Kenyans are served per judge and magistrate in the country. The chief justice was also correct that the number of cases filed in Kenyan courts every year exceeds the number of cases the judiciary settles by as much as 100,000, causing an ever-growing backlog. But there isn’t evidence of a global average for comparing the number of judges and magistrates per population – there are too many variables in different legal systems. To mark the tenth anniversary of Kenya’s constitution , broadcaster NTV interviewed current and former government officials on how the law has been applied. Chief justice David Maraga told NTV that while the 2010 constitution had sought to strengthen the judiciary’s independence, funding was a perennial headache. “[Budget cuts] hit the judiciary sometimes to a point that its operations grind to a halt,” Maraga said in the interview , published in August 2020. In recent months the chief justice has been vocal on how cuts have hampered the delivery of judicial services. In his interview, Maraga made several claims. We looked into their accuracy. Claim The judiciary does not even get 1% of the national budget Verdict correct Maraga, who assumed office in 2016, asked for more funding as “the judiciary does not even get 1% of the national budget”. “We have said, over and over again, that for the judiciary to operate properly we should get at least 2.5% of the national budget,” he said . Africa Check has previously found there isn’t a “recommended global percentage” of funding for the judiciary from the national budget. In 2018 Maraga also claimed it was 2.5%. To determine how much has been allocated to the judiciary in recent years we consulted the appropriation acts, the laws that show budget allocations to government departments. For the national budget, we checked budget statements. Judiciary amounts as share of Kenya budget Year Judiciary budget (KSh billion) National budget (KSh trillion) Share 2014/15 17.5 1.58 1.1% 2015/16 16.7 2 0.8% 2016/17 17.3 2.3 0.8% 2017/18 17.6 2.3 0.8% 2018/19 14.5 2.6 0.6% 2019/20 18.9 2.8 0.7% 2020/21 17.4 2.8 0.6% Sources: Budget speeches for 2020 , 2019 , 2018 , 2017 , 2016 , 2015 and 2014 and Appropriations Acts for 2020, 2019 , 2018 , 2017 , 2016 , 2015 and 2014 . Note: The figures shown have been rounded up. Only once in the last seven financial years, in 2014/15, did the judiciary receive more than 1% of the national budget. We therefore rate this claim as correct. Claim We have an average of 400,000 cases being filed in our courts every year Verdict correct The most recent state of the judiciary report covers the 2018/19 financial year. Released in January 2020, it shows that more than two million cases were lodged in all courts between 2014/15 and 2018/19. The report said : “The number of filed cases provides quantitative information on the extent of demand for court services by the public.” Total number of cases filed in the judiciary Financial year Cases 2014/15 334,685 2015/16 460,961 2016/17 344,180 2017/18 402,243 2018/19 484,349 Average 405,283 The average number of cases filed in the period covered by the report works out to 405,283 a year. We therefore rate this claim as correct. Claim We only dispose of about 300,000 cases Verdict correct Discussing the country’s case backlog, Maraga said the judiciary settles about 300,000 cases every year. This number was determined by the number of judges and magistrates and would only continue to pile up. “Unless the judiciary is given enough resources to have enough manpower, Kenyans will continue crying about delayed cases,” he said . The most recent state of the judiciary report has data covering 2014/15 to 2018/19. It shows an average of 321,652 cases settled across the five financial years. As of 2018/19 there were 153 judges and 546 magistrates in Kenya. Number of cases resolved by the judiciary Financial year Cases 2014/15 272,605 2015/16 191,625 2016/17 304,182 2017/18 370,488 2018/19 469,359 Average 321,652 We therefore rate the claim as correct. Claim In Kenya now with a population of about 48 million, we have one judge serving over 300,000 people Verdict correct There are 47.6 million people in Kenya, according to 2019 census data. The most recent data from the judiciary shows there were 153 judges as of June 2019. This works out to one judge for every 311,000 people. We rate this claim as correct. Claim We have one magistrate serving over 77,000 people Verdict understated The most recent data from the judiciary shows there were 546 magistrates in Kenya as of June 2019. The state of the judiciary report was released in January 2020. Using a population of 47.6 million , this works out to one magistrate for every 87,114 people. The chief justice’s figure was off by over 10,000 but it was still “over 77,000” people per magistrate. We therefore rate it as understated. Claim There is a ‘global average’ for the number of judges and magistrates to number of people Verdict unproven A calculation for a “global average” can be achieved by directly comparing the number of judges and magistrates to the world population. But to account for population differences, rates (per 100,000 people) are widely used . ( Note: See box below for more context. ) The chief justice has in the past spoken of a “recommended global percentage” of funding for the judiciary. We have contacted the judiciary for the source of the "global average" cited by the chief justice and will update this report with their response. Wachira Maina is a constitutional lawyer in Kenya who has written about the progress of institutions, including the judiciary, following the adoption of the 2010 constitution. He directed us to the UN Office of Drug and Crime (UNODC) for data on the administration of justice professionals against a country’s population. It shows there were 1.3 judges or magistrates for every 100,000 people in Kenya in 2014, 3.6 for South Africa in 2015, and 0.8 for the US and 8.7 for China in 2017. But the UNODC noted key weaknesses in the data when comparing countries. “The numbers reported are not restricted to judges deciding criminal cases,” it said. “The comparability problem might get even worse because some countries might still only report the number of judges whose duty is the judgment of criminal cases. “Apart from this, it is not clear whether really all judges are included in the reported figures in all countries.” Without a source for the chief justice’s claim of a global average, we can only rate this final claim as unproven. Is calculating the ratio of judges and magistrates to the population useful? The ratio of judges and magistrates to the population is useful depending on what you’re using it to show, Wachira Maina , a constitutional lawyer in Kenya told Africa Check. He gave an example of using the ratio of the number of doctors to the population as a metric for access to health, and of police officers to measure access to security services. However, he said, ratio data leaves a lot unstated, such as the distribution by region and by urban and rural areas. Therefore “to determine access to services, you will almost certainly need additional information”. “A high ratio by itself does not prove that most people have access to services, merely that if services were equitably distributed, and they rarely are, more people would have access,” Maina said. “Keep in mind though that you cannot increase access unless you have the numbers, so the ratio does still say something useful.” Chris Kerkering is a litigation manager at Katiba Institute , an organisation in Nairobi that promotes the knowledge of Kenya’s constitution. He told Africa Check that population does not automatically equate to a judge’s caseload. A very litigious society would have more cases per population, he said. Caseload and caseload weighting, which Kerkering described as not only counting the number of cases but also being able to determine how much time each respective case would take , may be the best way to determine whether a judiciary has the appropriate number of judges. But since doing a comparison between different countries with different legal systems and different cultures would be near impossible, “judges per population is a decent aggregate”, Kerkering said. He said the chief justice’s focus was on access to justice. “If there are not enough judges and the staff that support them then they are unable to provide the services that the judiciary requires. Case backlogs become one of the more obvious problems. Fewer judges mean that each judge is taking more cases.” “The more cases a judge has, the more time it takes to get through them. Access to justice requires timely decisions. The phrase ‘justice delayed is justice denied,’ is so commonly used for a reason. Often, as a case winds its way through the court system, avoidable delays result in long term harm.” “A judiciary that can’t get through its caseload promptly can’t ensure access to justice as required by the constitution.” Carlos Mureithi is a journalist based in Nairobi, Kenya Further reading: https://africacheck.org/reports/budget-cuts-hit-kenyas-judiciary-but-theres-no-global-funding-target/ Republish our content for free We believe that everyone needs the facts. You can republish the text of this article free of charge, both online and in print. However, we ask that you pay attention to these simple guidelines . In a nutshell: 1. Do not include images, as in most cases we do not own the copyright. 2. Please do not edit the article. 3. Make sure you credit "Africa Check" in the byline and don't forget to mention that the article was originally published on africacheck.org . Name Surname Email Leave this field blank Carlos Mureithi Claim Six claims about the Kenyan judiciary, from its budget and number of cases to how many judges and magistrates serve Kenya’s population. Verdict Four correct, one understated and one unproven Source Kenya’s chief justice, David Maraga (August 2020) Join us on WhatsApp Further Reading false Nigeria Trump USAid funding No, Trump cut USAid funding to Nigeria – and elsewhere – because of US interests, not because of corrupt Nigerian politicians false South Africa HIV HIV/AIDS United States funding government false claim No, 100% of South Africa’s HIV/Aids funding does not come from the United States – mostly funded by the South African government Nigeria budget debt policing Osita Chidoka aviation minister Fact-checking former minister Osita Chidoka's claims on Nigeria's 2025 budget, debt and policing Add new comment Your name Comment About text formats Restricted HTML Allowed HTML tags: <a href hreflang> <em> <strong> <cite> <blockquote cite> <code> <ul type> <ol start type> <li> <dl> <dt> <dd> <h2 id> <h3 id> <h4 id> <h5 id> <h6 id> Lines and paragraphs break automatically. Web page addresses and email addresses turn into links automatically. limit: 600 characters Leave this field blank Sign up to our newsletter Name Africa Check values your trust and is committed to the responsible management, use and protection of personal information. See our privacy policy. Leave this field blank Spot Checks View All false Nigeria Trump USAid funding No, Trump cut USAid funding to Nigeria – and elsewhere – because of US interests, not because of corrupt Nigerian politicians false South Africa HIV HIV/AIDS United States funding government false claim No, 100% of South Africa’s HIV/Aids funding does not come from the United States – mostly funded by the South African government Nigeria budget debt policing Osita Chidoka aviation minister Fact-checking former minister Osita Chidoka's claims on Nigeria's 2025 budget, debt and policing We hold public figures accountable For democracy to function, public figures need to be held to account for what they say. The claims they make need to be checked, openly and impartially. Africa Check is an independent, non-partisan organisation which assesses claims made in the public arena using journalistic skills and evidence drawn from the latest online tools, readers, public sources and experts, sorting fact from fiction and publishing the results. Browse by category Health Covid-19 Education Crime Economy Kenya Nigeria Senegal South Africa Sign up to our newsletter Name Africa Check values your trust and is committed to the responsible management, use and protection of personal information. See our privacy policy. Leave this field blank Follow us Facebook Twitter Instagram TikTok Footer About Partner With Us Terms and Conditions Contact Us Sitemap Want to keep reading our fact-checks? We will never charge you for verified, reliable information. Help us keep it that way by supporting our work. Become a newsletter subscriber Name Africa Check values your trust and is committed to the responsible management, use and protection of personal information. See our privacy policy. Leave this field blank Support independent fact-checking in Africa. See our donation optionsFactchecking Kenya’s chief justice on judiciary funding and backlog of cases - Africa Check Skip to main content English Français Main navigation Fact-checks Reports Factsheets Guides Spot Checks Blog Meta programme fact-checks Republish our work Who we are Our team Our impact How we are funded Partners Get in touch What we do Info Finder African Fact-Checking Awards Corrections Fact-checking research Training Media Literacy Educator knowledge hub How we fact-check Corrections policy Code of principles How we rate claims Get Involved Donate Submit a claim to fact-check Partner with us Join our team Fact-checking tips Quizzes Donate Back to Africa Check Factchecking Kenya’s chief justice on judiciary funding and backlog of cases Published on 17 September 2020 Claim Six claims about the Kenyan judiciary, from its budget and number of cases to how many judges and magistrates serve Kenya’s population. Verdict Four correct, one understated and one unproven Source Kenya’s chief justice, David Maraga (August 2020) This article is more than 4 years old Maraga was largely correct about the judiciary budget and how many Kenyans are served per judge and magistrate in the country. The chief justice was also correct that the number of cases filed in Kenyan courts every year exceeds the number of cases the judiciary settles by as much as 100,000, causing an ever-growing backlog. But there isn’t evidence of a global average for comparing the number of judges and magistrates per population – there are too many variables in different legal systems. To mark the tenth anniversary of Kenya’s constitution , broadcaster NTV interviewed current and former government officials on how the law has been applied. Chief justice David Maraga told NTV that while the 2010 constitution had sought to strengthen the judiciary’s independence, funding was a perennial headache. “[Budget cuts] hit the judiciary sometimes to a point that its operations grind to a halt,” Maraga said in the interview , published in August 2020. In recent months the chief justice has been vocal on how cuts have hampered the delivery of judicial services. In his interview, Maraga made several claims. We looked into their accuracy. Claim The judiciary does not even get 1% of the national budget Verdict correct Maraga, who assumed office in 2016, asked for more funding as “the judiciary does not even get 1% of the national budget”. “We have said, over and over again, that for the judiciary to operate properly we should get at least 2.5% of the national budget,” he said . Africa Check has previously found there isn’t a “recommended global percentage” of funding for the judiciary from the national budget. In 2018 Maraga also claimed it was 2.5%. To determine how much has been allocated to the judiciary in recent years we consulted the appropriation acts, the laws that show budget allocations to government departments. For the national budget, we checked budget statements. Judiciary amounts as share of Kenya budget Year Judiciary budget (KSh billion) National budget (KSh trillion) Share 2014/15 17.5 1.58 1.1% 2015/16 16.7 2 0.8% 2016/17 17.3 2.3 0.8% 2017/18 17.6 2.3 0.8% 2018/19 14.5 2.6 0.6% 2019/20 18.9 2.8 0.7% 2020/21 17.4 2.8 0.6% Sources: Budget speeches for 2020 , 2019 , 2018 , 2017 , 2016 , 2015 and 2014 and Appropriations Acts for 2020, 2019 , 2018 , 2017 , 2016 , 2015 and 2014 . Note: The figures shown have been rounded up. Only once in the last seven financial years, in 2014/15, did the judiciary receive more than 1% of the national budget. We therefore rate this claim as correct. Claim We have an average of 400,000 cases being filed in our courts every year Verdict correct The most recent state of the judiciary report covers the 2018/19 financial year. Released in January 2020, it shows that more than two million cases were lodged in all courts between 2014/15 and 2018/19. The report said : “The number of filed cases provides quantitative information on the extent of demand for court services by the public.” Total number of cases filed in the judiciary Financial year Cases 2014/15 334,685 2015/16 460,961 2016/17 344,180 2017/18 402,243 2018/19 484,349 Average 405,283 The average number of cases filed in the period covered by the report works out to 405,283 a year. We therefore rate this claim as correct. Claim We only dispose of about 300,000 cases Verdict correct Discussing the country’s case backlog, Maraga said the judiciary settles about 300,000 cases every year. This number was determined by the number of judges and magistrates and would only continue to pile up. “Unless the judiciary is given enough resources to have enough manpower, Kenyans will continue crying about delayed cases,” he said . The most recent state of the judiciary report has data covering 2014/15 to 2018/19. It shows an average of 321,652 cases settled across the five financial years. As of 2018/19 there were 153 judges and 546 magistrates in Kenya. Number of cases resolved by the judiciary Financial year Cases 2014/15 272,605 2015/16 191,625 2016/17 304,182 2017/18 370,488 2018/19 469,359 Average 321,652 We therefore rate the claim as correct. Claim In Kenya now with a population of about 48 million, we have one judge serving over 300,000 people Verdict correct There are 47.6 million people in Kenya, according to 2019 census data. The most recent data from the judiciary shows there were 153 judges as of June 2019. This works out to one judge for every 311,000 people. We rate this claim as correct. Claim We have one magistrate serving over 77,000 people Verdict understated The most recent data from the judiciary shows there were 546 magistrates in Kenya as of June 2019. The state of the judiciary report was released in January 2020. Using a population of 47.6 million , this works out to one magistrate for every 87,114 people. The chief justice’s figure was off by over 10,000 but it was still “over 77,000” people per magistrate. We therefore rate it as understated. Claim There is a ‘global average’ for the number of judges and magistrates to number of people Verdict unproven A calculation for a “global average” can be achieved by directly comparing the number of judges and magistrates to the world population. But to account for population differences, rates (per 100,000 people) are widely used . ( Note: See box below for more context. ) The chief justice has in the past spoken of a “recommended global percentage” of funding for the judiciary. We have contacted the judiciary for the source of the "global average" cited by the chief justice and will update this report with their response. Wachira Maina is a constitutional lawyer in Kenya who has written about the progress of institutions, including the judiciary, following the adoption of the 2010 constitution. He directed us to the UN Office of Drug and Crime (UNODC) for data on the administration of justice professionals against a country’s population. It shows there were 1.3 judges or magistrates for every 100,000 people in Kenya in 2014, 3.6 for South Africa in 2015, and 0.8 for the US and 8.7 for China in 2017. But the UNODC noted key weaknesses in the data when comparing countries. “The numbers reported are not restricted to judges deciding criminal cases,” it said. “The comparability problem might get even worse because some countries might still only report the number of judges whose duty is the judgment of criminal cases. “Apart from this, it is not clear whether really all judges are included in the reported figures in all countries.” Without a source for the chief justice’s claim of a global average, we can only rate this final claim as unproven. Is calculating the ratio of judges and magistrates to the population useful? The ratio of judges and magistrates to the population is useful depending on what you’re using it to show, Wachira Maina , a constitutional lawyer in Kenya told Africa Check. He gave an example of using the ratio of the number of doctors to the population as a metric for access to health, and of police officers to measure access to security services. However, he said, ratio data leaves a lot unstated, such as the distribution by region and by urban and rural areas. Therefore “to determine access to services, you will almost certainly need additional information”. “A high ratio by itself does not prove that most people have access to services, merely that if services were equitably distributed, and they rarely are, more people would have access,” Maina said. “Keep in mind though that you cannot increase access unless you have the numbers, so the ratio does still say something useful.” Chris Kerkering is a litigation manager at Katiba Institute , an organisation in Nairobi that promotes the knowledge of Kenya’s constitution. He told Africa Check that population does not automatically equate to a judge’s caseload. A very litigious society would have more cases per population, he said. Caseload and caseload weighting, which Kerkering described as not only counting the number of cases but also being able to determine how much time each respective case would take , may be the best way to determine whether a judiciary has the appropriate number of judges. But since doing a comparison between different countries with different legal systems and different cultures would be near impossible, “judges per population is a decent aggregate”, Kerkering said. He said the chief justice’s focus was on access to justice. “If there are not enough judges and the staff that support them then they are unable to provide the services that the judiciary requires. Case backlogs become one of the more obvious problems. Fewer judges mean that each judge is taking more cases.” “The more cases a judge has, the more time it takes to get through them. Access to justice requires timely decisions. The phrase ‘justice delayed is justice denied,’ is so commonly used for a reason. Often, as a case winds its way through the court system, avoidable delays result in long term harm.” “A judiciary that can’t get through its caseload promptly can’t ensure access to justice as required by the constitution.” Carlos Mureithi is a journalist based in Nairobi, Kenya Further reading: https://africacheck.org/reports/budget-cuts-hit-kenyas-judiciary-but-theres-no-global-funding-target/ Republish our content for free We believe that everyone needs the facts. You can republish the text of this article free of charge, both online and in print. However, we ask that you pay attention to these simple guidelines . In a nutshell: 1. Do not include images, as in most cases we do not own the copyright. 2. Please do not edit the article. 3. Make sure you credit "Africa Check" in the byline and don't forget to mention that the article was originally published on africacheck.org . Name Surname Email Leave this field blank Carlos Mureithi Claim Six claims about the Kenyan judiciary, from its budget and number of cases to how many judges and magistrates serve Kenya’s population. Verdict Four correct, one understated and one unproven Source Kenya’s chief justice, David Maraga (August 2020) Join us on WhatsApp Further Reading false Nigeria Trump USAid funding No, Trump cut USAid funding to Nigeria – and elsewhere – because of US interests, not because of corrupt Nigerian politicians false South Africa HIV HIV/AIDS United States funding government false claim No, 100% of South Africa’s HIV/Aids funding does not come from the United States – mostly funded by the South African government Nigeria budget debt policing Osita Chidoka aviation minister Fact-checking former minister Osita Chidoka's claims on Nigeria's 2025 budget, debt and policing Add new comment Your name Comment About text formats Restricted HTML Allowed HTML tags: <a href hreflang> <em> <strong> <cite> <blockquote cite> <code> <ul type> <ol start type> <li> <dl> <dt> <dd> <h2 id> <h3 id> <h4 id> <h5 id> <h6 id> Lines and paragraphs break automatically. Web page addresses and email addresses turn into links automatically. limit: 600 characters Leave this field blank Sign up to our newsletter Name Africa Check values your trust and is committed to the responsible management, use and protection of personal information. See our privacy policy. Leave this field blank Spot Checks View All false Nigeria Trump USAid funding No, Trump cut USAid funding to Nigeria – and elsewhere – because of US interests, not because of corrupt Nigerian politicians false South Africa HIV HIV/AIDS United States funding government false claim No, 100% of South Africa’s HIV/Aids funding does not come from the United States – mostly funded by the South African government Nigeria budget debt policing Osita Chidoka aviation minister Fact-checking former minister Osita Chidoka's claims on Nigeria's 2025 budget, debt and policing We hold public figures accountable For democracy to function, public figures need to be held to account for what they say. The claims they make need to be checked, openly and impartially. Africa Check is an independent, non-partisan organisation which assesses claims made in the public arena using journalistic skills and evidence drawn from the latest online tools, readers, public sources and experts, sorting fact from fiction and publishing the results. Browse by category Health Covid-19 Education Crime Economy Kenya Nigeria Senegal South Africa Sign up to our newsletter Name Africa Check values your trust and is committed to the responsible management, use and protection of personal information. See our privacy policy. Leave this field blank Follow us Facebook Twitter Instagram TikTok Footer About Partner With Us Terms and Conditions Contact Us Sitemap Want to keep reading our fact-checks? We will never charge you for verified, reliable information. Help us keep it that way by supporting our work. Become a newsletter subscriber Name Africa Check values your trust and is committed to the responsible management, use and protection of personal information. See our privacy policy. Leave this field blank Support independent fact-checking in Africa. See our donation options